
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74237 ***


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_. In the printed
original, emphasis is indicated by gesperrt (_spaced_) text, but is here
also delimited as the italic.

The few footnotes have been collected at the end of the Act in which
they are referenced.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any other textual issues encountered during its
preparation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




THE COLLECTED WORKS OF
      HENRIK IBSEN








                                                      VOLUME X
                                                      HEDDA GABLER

                                                      THE MASTER BUILDER

                         THE COLLECTED WORKS OF
                              HENRIK IBSEN

             _Copyright Edition.   Complete in 12 Volumes._
                      _Crown 8vo, price 4s. each._

                    =ENTIRELY REVISED AND EDITED BY=
                            =WILLIAM ARCHER=

         Vol. I.      Lady Inger, The Feast at Solhoug, Love’s
                        Comedy

         Vol. II.     The Vikings, The Pretenders

         Vol. III.    Brand

         Vol. IV.     Peer Gynt

         Vol. V.      Emperor and Galilean (2 parts)

         Vol. VI.     The League of Youth, Pillars of Society

         Vol. VII.    A Doll’s House, Ghosts

         Vol. VIII.   An Enemy of the People, The Wild Duck

         Vol. IX.     Rosmersholm, The Lady from the Sea

         Vol. X.      Hedda Gabler, The Master Builder

         Vol. XI.     Little Eyolf, John Gabriel Borkman, When
                        We Dead Awaken

         Vol. XII.    From Ibsen’s Workshop

                       LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN.
                        21 BEDFORD STREET, W.C.

                         THE COLLECTED WORKS OF
                              HENRIK IBSEN

                           COPYRIGHT EDITION

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                VOLUME X

                              HEDDA GABLER
                           THE MASTER BUILDER

                         WITH INTRODUCTIONS BY
                             WILLIAM ARCHER

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: title page]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                 LONDON
                           WILLIAM HEINEMANN
                                  1912




                            UNIFORM EDITION
                       _First Printed, June 1907_
            _New Impressions, September 1909, November 1912_








                            _Copyright 1907_




                                CONTENTS

                                                              PAGE
     INTRODUCTION TO “HEDDA GABLER”                            vii

     INTRODUCTION TO “THE MASTER BUILDER”                      xix

     “HEDDA GABLER”                                              1

         _Translated by_ EDMUND GOSSE and WILLIAM ARCHER

     “THE MASTER BUILDER”                                      187
         _Translated by_ EDMUND GOSSE and WILLIAM ARCHER




                             HEDDA GABLER.

                             INTRODUCTION.


From Munich, on June 29, 1890, Ibsen wrote to the Swedish poet, Count
Carl Snoilsky: “Our intention has all along been to spend the summer in
the Tyrol again. But circumstances are against our doing so. I am at
present engaged upon a new dramatic work, which for several reasons has
made very slow progress, and I do not leave Munich until I can take with
me the completed first draft. There is little or no prospect of my being
able to complete it in July.” Ibsen did not leave Munich at all that
season. On October 30 he wrote: “At present I am utterly engrossed in a
new play. Not one leisure hour have I had for several months.” Three
weeks later (November 20) he wrote to his French translator, Count
Prozor: “My new play is finished; the manuscript went off to Copenhagen
the day before yesterday.... It produces a curious feeling of emptiness
to be thus suddenly separated from a work which has occupied one’s time
and thoughts for several months, to the exclusion of all else. But it is
a good thing, too, to have done with it. The constant intercourse with
the fictitious personages was beginning to make me quite nervous.” To
the same correspondent he wrote on December 4: ”The title of the play is
_Hedda Gabler_. My intention in giving it this name was to indicate that
Hedda, as a personality, is to be regarded rather as her father’s
daughter than as her husband’s wife. It was not my desire to deal in
this play with so-called problems. What I principally wanted to do was
to depict human beings, human emotions, and human destinies, upon a
groundwork of certain of the social conditions and principles of the
present day.“

So far we read the history of the play in the official
“Correspondence.”[1] Some interesting glimpses into the poet’s moods
during the period between the completion of _The Lady from the Sea_ and
the publication of _Hedda Gabler_ are to be found in the series of
letters to Fräulein Emilie Bardach, of Vienna, published by Dr. George
Brandes.[2] This young lady Ibsen met at Gossensass in the Tyrol in the
autumn of 1889. The record of their brief friendship belongs to the
history of _The Master Builder_ rather than to that of _Hedda Gabler_,
but the allusions to his work in his letters to her during the winter of
1889 demand some examination.

So early as October 7, 1889, he writes to her: ”A new poem begins to
dawn in me. I will execute it this winter, and try to transfer to it the
bright atmosphere of the summer. But I feel that it will end in
sadness—such is my nature.“ Was this “dawning” poem _Hedda Gabler_? Or
was it rather _The Master Builder_ that was germinating in his mind? Who
shall say? The latter hypothesis seems the more probable, for it is hard
to believe that, at any stage in the incubation of _Hedda Gabler_, he
can have conceived it as even beginning in a key of gaiety. A week
later, however, he appears to have made up his mind that the time had
not come for the poetic utilisation of his recent experiences. He writes
on October 15: ”Here I sit as usual at my writing-table. Now I would
fain work, but am unable to. My fancy, indeed, is very active. But it
always wanders away. It wanders where it has no business to wander
during working hours. I cannot repress my summer memories—nor do I wish
to. I live through my experiences again and again and yet again. To
transmute it all into a poem, I find, in the meantime, impossible.“
Clearly, then, he felt that his imagination ought to have been engaged
on some theme having no relation to his summer experiences—the theme, no
doubt, of _Hedda Gabler_. In his next letter, dated October 29, he
writes: “Do not be troubled because I cannot, in the meantime, create
(_dichten_). In reality I am for ever creating, or, at any rate,
dreaming of something which, when in the fulness of time it ripens, will
reveal itself as a creation (_Dichtung_).” On November 19 he says: “I am
very busily occupied with preparations for my new poem. I sit almost the
whole day at my writing-table. Go out only in the evening for a little
while.” The five following letters contain no allusion to the play; but
on September 18, 1890, he wrote: “My wife and son are at present at
Riva, on the Lake of Garda, and will probably remain there until the
middle of October, or even longer. Thus I am quite alone here, and
cannot get away. The new play on which I am at present engaged will
probably not be ready until November, though I sit at my writing-table
daily, and almost the whole day long.”

Here ends the history of _Hedda Gabler_, so far as the poet’s letters
carry us. Its hard clear outlines, and perhaps somewhat bleak
atmosphere, seem to have resulted from a sort of reaction against the
sentimental “dreamery” begotten of his Gossensass experiences. He sought
refuge in the chill materialism of Hedda from the ardent
transcendentalism of Hilda, whom he already heard knocking at the door.
He was not yet in the mood to deal with her on the plane of poetry.[3]

_Hedda Gabler_ was published in Copenhagen on December 16, 1890. This
was the first of Ibsen’s plays to be translated from proof-sheets and
published in England and America almost simultaneously with its first
appearance in Scandinavia. The earliest theatrical performance took
place at the Residenz Theater, Munich, on the last day of January 1891,
in the presence of the poet, Frau Conrad-Ramlo playing the title-part.
The Lessing Theater, Berlin, followed suit on February 10. Not till
February 25 was the play seen in Copenhagen, with Fru Hennings as Hedda.
On the following night it was given for the first time in Christiania,
the Norwegian Hedda being Fröken Constance Bruun. It was this production
which the poet saw when he visited the Christiania Theater for the first
time after his return to Norway, August 28, 1891. It would take pages to
give even the baldest list of the productions and revivals of _Hedda
Gabler_ in Scandinavia and Germany, where it has always ranked among
Ibsen’s most popular works. The admirable production of the play by Miss
Elizabeth Robins and Miss Marion Lea, at the Vaudeville Theatre, London,
April 20, 1891, may be counted the second great step towards the
popularisation of Ibsen in England, the first being the
Charrington-Achurch production of _A Doll’s House_ in 1889. Miss Robins
afterwards repeated her fine performance of Hedda many times, in London,
in the English provinces, and in New York. The character has also been
acted in London by Eleonora Duse, and as I write (March 5, 1907) by Mrs.
Patrick Campbell, at the Court Theatre. In America, Hedda has frequently
been acted by Mrs. Fiske, Miss Nance O’Neill and other actresses—quite
recently by a Russian actress, Madame Alla Nazimova, who (playing in
English) has made a great success both in this part and in Nora. The
first French Hedda Gabler was Mlle. Marthe Brandès, who played the part
at the Vaudeville Theatre, Paris, on December 17, 1891, the performance
being introduced by a lecture by M. Jules Lemaître. In Holland, in
Italy, in Russia, the play has been acted times without number. In short
(as might easily have been foretold) it has rivalled _A Doll’s House_ in
world-wide popularity.

It has been suggested,[4] I think without sufficient ground, that Ibsen
deliberately conceived _Hedda Gabler_ as an “international” play, and
that the scene is really the “west end” of any great European city. To
me it seems quite clear that Ibsen had Christiania in mind, and the
Christiania of a somewhat earlier period than the ’nineties. The
electric cars, telephones, and other conspicuous factors in the life of
a modern capital are notably absent from the play. There is no electric
light in Secretary Falk’s villa. It is still the habit for ladies to
return on foot from evening parties, with gallant swains escorting them.
This “suburbanism,” which so distressed the London critics of 1891, was
characteristic of the Christiania Ibsen himself had known in the
’sixties—the Christiania of _Love’s Comedy_—rather than of the greatly
extended and modernised city of the end of the century. Moreover,
Lövborg’s allusions to the fiord, and the suggested picture of Sheriff
Elvsted, his family and his avocations, are all distinctively Norwegian.
The truth seems to be very simple—the environment and the subsidiary
personages are all thoroughly national, but Hedda herself is an
“international” type, a product of civilisation by no means peculiar to
Norway.

We cannot point to any individual model or models who “sat to” Ibsen for
the character of Hedda.[5] The late Grant Allen declared that Hedda was
“nothing more nor less than the girl we take down to dinner in London
nineteen times out of twenty”; in which case Ibsen must have suffered
from a superfluity of models, rather than from any difficulty in finding
one. But the fact is that in this, as in all other instances, the word
“model” must be taken in a very different sense from that in which it is
commonly used in painting. Ibsen undoubtedly used models for this trait
and that, but never for a whole figure. If his characters can be called
portraits at all, they are composite portraits. Even when it seems
pretty clear that the initial impulse towards the creation of a
particular character came from some individual, the original figure is
entirely transmuted in the process of harmonisation with the dramatic
scheme. We need not, therefore, look for a definite prototype of Hedda;
but Dr. Brandes shows that two of that lady’s exploits were probably
suggested by the anecdotic history of the day.

Ibsen had no doubt heard how the wife of a well-known Norwegian
composer, in a fit of raging jealousy excited by her husband’s prolonged
absence from home, burnt the manuscript of a symphony which he had just
finished. The circumstances under which Hedda burns Lövborg’s manuscript
are, of course, entirely different and infinitely more dramatic; but
here we have merely another instance of the dramatisation or
“poetisation” of the raw material of life. Again, a still more painful
incident probably came to his knowledge about the same time. A beautiful
and very intellectual woman was married to a well-known man who had been
addicted to drink, but had entirely conquered the vice. One day a mad
whim seized her to put his self-mastery and her power over him to the
test. As it happened to be his birthday, she rolled into his study a
small keg of brandy, and then withdrew. She returned some time
afterwards to find that he had broached the keg, and lay insensible on
the floor. In this anecdote we cannot but recognise the germ, not only
of Hedda’s temptation of Lövborg, but of a large part of her character.

“Thus,” says Dr. Brandes, “out of small and scattered traits of reality
Ibsen fashioned his close-knit and profoundly thought-out works of art.”

For the character of Eilert Lövborg, again, Ibsen seems unquestionably
to have borrowed several traits from a definite original. A young Danish
man of letters, whom Dr. Brandes calls Holm, was an enthusiastic admirer
of Ibsen, and came to be on very friendly terms with him. One day Ibsen
was astonished to receive, in Munich, a parcel addressed from Berlin by
this young man, containing, without a word of explanation, a packet of
his (Ibsen’s) letters, and a photograph which he had presented to Holm.
Ibsen brooded and brooded over the incident, and at last came to the
conclusion that the young man had intended to return her letters and
photograph to a young lady to whom he was known to be attached, and had
in a fit of aberration mixed up the two objects of his worship. Some
time after, Holm appeared at Ibsen’s rooms. He talked quite rationally,
but professed to have no knowledge whatever of the letter-incident,
though he admitted the truth of Ibsen’s conjecture that the “belle dame
sans merci” had demanded the return of her letters and portrait. Ibsen
was determined to get at the root of the mystery; and a little inquiry
into his young friend’s habits revealed the fact that he broke his fast
on a bottle of port wine, consumed a bottle of Rhine wine at lunch, of
Burgundy at dinner, and finished off the evening with one or two more
bottles of port. Then he heard, too, how, in the course of a night’s
carouse, Holm had lost the manuscript of a book; and in these traits he
saw the outline of the figure of Eilert Lövborg.

Some time elapsed, and again Ibsen received a postal packet from Holm.
This one contained his will, in which Ibsen figured as his residuary
legatee. But many other legatees were mentioned in the instrument—all of
them ladies, such as Fräulein Alma Rothbart, of Bremen, and Fräulein
Elise Kraushaar, of Berlin. The bequests to these meritorious spinsters
were so generous that their sum considerably exceeded the amount of the
testator’s property. Ibsen gently but firmly declined the proffered
inheritance; but Holm’s will no doubt suggested to him the figure of
that red-haired “Mademoiselle Diana” who is heard of but not seen in
_Hedda Gabler_, and enabled him to add some further traits to the
portraiture of Lövborg. When the play appeared, Holm recognised himself
with glee in the character of the bibulous man of letters, and
thereafter adopted “Eilert Lövborg” as his pseudonym. I do not,
therefore, see why Dr. Brandes should suppress his real name; but I
willingly imitate him in erring on the side of discretion. The poor
fellow died several years ago.

Some critics have been greatly troubled as to the precise meaning of
Hedda’s fantastic vision of Lövborg “with vine-leaves in his hair.”
Surely this is a very obvious image or symbol of the beautiful, tho
ideal, aspect of bacchic elation and revelry. Antique art, or I am much
mistaken, shows us many figures of Dionysus himself and his followers
with vine-leaves entwined in their hair. To Ibsen’s mind, at any rate,
the image had long been familiar. In _Peer Gynt_ (Act iv. sc. 8), when
Peer, having carried off Anitra, finds himself in a particularly festive
mood, he cries: “Were there vine-leaves around, I would garland my
brow.” Again, in _Emperor and Galilean_ (Pt. II. Act i.) where Julian,
in the procession of Dionysus, impersonates the god himself, it is
directed that he shall wear a wreath of vine-leaves. Professor
Dietrichson relates that among the young artists whose society Ibsen
frequented during his first years in Rome, it was customary, at their
little festivals, for the revellers to deck themselves in this fashion.
But the image is so obvious that there is no need to trace it to any
personal experience. The attempt to place Hedda’s vine-leaves among
Ibsen’s obscurities is an example of the firm resolution not to
understand which animated the criticism of the ’nineties.

Dr. Brandes has dealt very severely with the character of Eilert
Lövborg, alleging that we cannot believe in the genius attributed to
him. But where is he described as a genius? The poet represents him as a
very able student of sociology; but that is a quite different thing from
attributing to him such genius as must necessarily shine forth in every
word he utters. Dr. Brandes, indeed, declines to believe even in his
ability as a sociologist, on the ground that it is idle to write about
the social development of the future. “To our prosaic minds,” he says,
“it may seem as if the most sensible utterance on the subject is that of
the fool of the play: ‘The future! Good heavens, we know nothing of the
future.’” The best retort to this criticism is that which Eilert himself
makes: ”There’s a thing or two to be said about it all the same.“ The
intelligent forecasting of the future (as Mr. H. G. Wells has shown) is
not only clearly distinguishable from fantastic Utopianism, but is
indispensable to any large statesmanship or enlightened social activity.
With very real and very great respect for Dr. Brandes, I cannot think
that he has been fortunate in his treatment of Lövborg’s character. It
has been represented as an absurdity that he should think of reading
extracts from his new book to a man like Tesman, whom he despises. But
though Tesman is a ninny, he is, as Hedda says, a ”specialist“—he is a
competent, plodding student of his subject. Lövborg may quite naturally
wish to see how his new method, or his excursion into a new field,
strikes the average scholar of the Tesman type. He is, in fact, ”trying
it on the dog“—neither an unreasonable nor an unusual proceeding. There
is, no doubt, a certain improbability in the way in which Lövborg is
represented as carrying his manuscript around, and especially in Mrs.
Elvsted’s production of his rough draft from her pocket; but these are
mechanical trifles, on which only a niggling criticism would dream of
laying stress.

Of all Ibsen’s works, _Hedda Gabler_ is the most detached, the most
objective—a character-study pure and simple. It is impossible—or so it
seems to me—to extract any sort of general idea from it. One cannot even
call it a satire, unless one is prepared to apply that term to the
record of a “case” in a work on criminology. Reverting to Dumas’s dictum
that a play should contain “a painting, a judgment, an ideal,” we may
say that _Hedda Gabler_ fulfils only the first of these requirements.
The poet does not even pass judgment on his heroine: he simply paints
her full-length portrait with scientific impassivity. But what a
portrait! How searching in insight, how brilliant in colouring, how rich
in detail! Grant Allen’s remark, above quoted, was, of course, a
whimsical exaggeration: the Hedda type is not so common as all that,
else the world would quickly come to an end. But particular traits and
tendencies of the Hedda type are very common in modern life, and not
only among women. Hyperæsthesia lies at the root of her tragedy. With a
keenly critical, relentlessly solvent intelligence, she combines a
morbid shrinking from all the gross and prosaic detail of the sensual
life. She has nothing to take her out of herself—not a single
intellectual interest or moral enthusiasm. She cherishes, in a languid
way, a petty social ambition; and even that she finds obstructed and
baffled. At the same time she learns that another woman has had the
courage to love and venture all, where she, in her cowardice, only
hankered and refrained. Her malign egoism rises up uncontrolled, and
calls to its aid her quick and subtle intellect. She ruins the other
woman’s happiness, but in doing so incurs a danger from which her sense
of personal dignity revolts. Life has no such charm for her that she
cares to purchase it at the cost of squalid humiliation and
self-contempt. The good and the bad in her alike impel her to have done
with it all; and a pistol-shot ends what is surely one of the most
poignant character-tragedies in literature. Ibsen’s brain never worked
at higher pressure than in the conception and adjustment of those
“crowded hours” in which Hedda, tangled in the web of Will and
Circumstance, struggles on till she is too weary to struggle any more.

It may not be superfluous to note that the “a” in “Gabler” should be
sounded long and full, like the “a” in “garden”—_not_ like the “a” in
“gable” or in “gabble.”

-----

Footnote 1:

  Letters 214, 216, 217, 219.

Footnote 2:

  In the Ibsen volume of _Die Literatur_ (Berlin).

Footnote 3:

  Dr. Julius Elias (_Neue deutsche Rundschau_, December 1906, p. 1462)
  makes the curious assertion that the character of Thea Elvsted was in
  part borrowed from this “Gossensasser Hildetypus.” It is hard to see
  how even Ibsen’s ingenuity could distil from the same flower two such
  different essences as Thea and Hilda.

Footnote 4:

  See article by Herman Bang in _Neue deutsche Rundschau_, December
  1906, p. 1495.

Footnote 5:

  Dr. Brahm (_Neue deutsche Rundschau_, December 1906, p. 1422) says
  that, after the first performance of _Hedda Gabler_ in Berlin, Ibsen
  confided to him that the character had been suggested by a German lady
  whom he met in Munich, and who did not shoot, but poisoned herself.
  Nothing more seems to be known of this lady. See, too, an article by
  Julius Elias in the same magazine, p. 1460.




                          THE MASTER BUILDER.

                             INTRODUCTION.


With _The Master Builder_—or _Master Builder Solness_, as the title runs
in the original—we enter upon the final stage in Ibsen’s career. “You
are essentially right,” the poet wrote to Count Prozor in March 1900,
“when you say that the series which closes with the Epilogue (_When We
Dead Awaken_) began with _Master Builder Solness_.”

“Ibsen,” says Dr. Brahm, ”wrote in Christiania all the four works which
he thus seems to bracket together—_Solness_, _Eyolf_, _Borkman_, and
_When We Dead Awaken_. He returned to Norway in July 1891, for a stay of
indefinite length; but the restless wanderer over Europe was destined to
leave his home no more.... He had not returned, however, to throw
himself, as of old, into the battle of the passing day. Polemics are
entirely absent from the poetry of his old age. He leaves the State and
Society at peace. He who had departed as the creator of Falk [in _Love’s
Comedy_] now, on his return, gazes, not satirically, but rather in a
lyric mood, into the secret places of human nature and the wonders of
his own soul.“

Dr. Brahm, however, seems to be mistaken in thinking that Ibsen returned
to Norway with no definite intention of settling down. Dr. Julius Elias
(an excellent authority) reports that shortly before Ibsen left Munich
in 1891, he remarked one day, “I must get back to the North!” “Is that a
sudden impulse?” asked Elias. “Oh no,” was the reply; ”I want to be a
good head of a household and have my affairs in order. To that end I
must consolidate my property, lay it down in good securities, and get it
under control—and that one can best do where one has rights of
citizenship.“ Some critics will no doubt be shocked to find the poet
whom they have written down an “anarchist” confessing such bourgeois
motives.

After his return to Norway, Ibsen’s correspondence became very scant,
and we have no letters dating from the period when he was at work on
_The Master Builder_. On the other hand, we possess a curious lyrical
prelude to the play, which he put on paper on March 16, 1892. It is said
to have been his habit, before setting to work on a play, to
“crystallise in a poem the mood which then possessed him”; but the
following is the only one of these keynote-poems which has been
published. I give it in the original language, with a literal
translation:

                          DE SAD DER, DE TO—

                 De sad der, de to, i saa lunt et hus
                 ved höst og i vinterdage,
                 Saa brændte huset. Alt ligger i grus.
                 De to faar i asken rage.

                 For nede i den er et smykke gemt,—
                 et smykke, som aldrig kan brænde,
                 Og leder de trofast, hænder det nemt
                 at det findes af ham eller hende.

                 Men finder de end, de brandlidte to,
                 det dyre, ildfaste smykke,—
                 aldrig hun finder sin brændte tro,
                 han aldrig sin brændte lykke.

                        THEY SAT THERE, THE TWO—

  They sat there, the two, in so cosy a house, through autumn and winter
  days. Then the house burned down. Everything lies in ruins. The two
  must grope among the ashes.

  For among them is hidden a jewel—a jewel that never can burn. And if
  they search faithfully, it may easily happen that he or she may find
  it.

  But even should they find it, the burnt-out two—find this precious
  unburnable jewel—never will she find her burnt faith, he never his
  burnt happiness.

This is the latest piece of Ibsen’s verse that has been given to the
world; but one of his earliest poems—first printed in 1858—was also, in
some sort, a prelude to _The Master Builder_. Of this a literal
translation may suffice. It is called

                             BUILDING-PLANS

  I remember as clearly as if it had been to-day the evening when, in
  the paper, I saw my first poem in print. There I sat in my den, and,
  with long-drawn puffs, I smoked and I dreamed in blissful
  self-complacency.

  ”I will build a cloud-castle. It shall shine all over the North. It
  shall have two wings: one little and one great. The great wing shall
  shelter a deathless poet; the little wing shall serve as a young
  girl’s bower.“

  The plan seemed to me nobly harmonious; but as time went on it fell
  into confusion. When the master grew reasonable, the castle turned
  utterly crazy; the great wing became too little, the little wing fell
  to ruin.

Thus we see that, thirty-five years before the date of _The Master
Builder_, Ibsen’s imagination was preoccupied with a symbol of a master
building a castle in the air, and a young girl in one of its towers.

There has been some competition among the poet’s young lady friends for
the honour of having served as his model for Hilda. Several, no doubt,
are entitled to some share in it. One is not surprised to learn that
among the papers he left behind were sheaves upon sheaves of letters
from women. “All these ladies,” says Dr. Julius Elias, ”demanded
something of him—some cure for their agonies of soul, or for the
incomprehension from which they suffered; some solution of the riddle of
their nature. Almost every one of them regarded herself as a problem to
which Ibsen could not but have the time and the interest to apply
himself. They all thought they had a claim on the creator of Nora.... Of
this chapter of his experience, Fru Ibsen spoke with ironic humour.
‘Ibsen (I have often said to him), Ibsen, keep these swarms of
over-strained womenfolk at arm’s length.’ ‘Oh no (he would reply), let
them alone. I want to observe them more closely.’ His observations would
take a longer or shorter time as the case might be, and would always
contribute to some work of art.“

The principal model for Hilda was doubtless Fräulein Emilie Bardach, of
Vienna, whom he met at Gossensass in the autumn of 1889. He was then
sixty-one years of age; she is said to have been seventeen. As the lady
herself handed his letters to Dr. Brandes for publication, there can be
no indiscretion in speaking of them freely. Some passages from them I
have quoted in the introduction to _Hedda Gabler_—passages which show
that at first the poet deliberately put aside his Gossensass impressions
for use when he should stand at a greater distance from them, and
meanwhile devoted himself to work in a totally different key. On October
15, 1889, he writes, in his second letter to Fräulein Bardach: “I cannot
repress my summer memories, nor do I want to. I live through my
experiences again and again, and yet again. To transmute it all into a
poem I find, in the meantime, impossible. In the meantime? Shall I
succeed in doing so sometime in the future? And do I really wish to
succeed? In the meantime, at any rate, I do not.... And yet it must come
in time.” The letters number twelve in all, and are couched in a tone of
sentimental regret for the brief, bright summer days of their
acquaintanceship. The keynote is struck in the inscription on the back
of a photograph which he gave her before they parted: _An die Maisonne
eines Septemberlebens—in Tirol_, 27/9/89.[6] In her album he had written
the words:

                   Hohes, schmerzliches Glück—
                   um das Unerreichbare zu ringen![7]

in which we may, if we like, see a foreshadowing of the Solness frame of
mind. In the fifth letter of the series he refers to her as “an
enigmatic Princess”; in the sixth he twice calls her “my dear Princess”;
but this is the only point at which the letters quite definitely and
unmistakably point forward to _The Master Builder_. In the ninth letter
(February 6, 1890) he says: “I feel it a matter of conscience to end,
or, at any rate, to restrict, our correspondence.” The tenth letter, six
months later, is one of kindly condolence on the death of the young
lady’s father. In the eleventh (very short) note, dated December 30,
1890, he acknowledges some small gift, but says: “Please, for the
present, do not write to me again.... I will soon send you my new play
[_Hedda Gabler_]. Receive it in friendship, but in silence!” This
injunction she apparently obeyed. When _The Master Builder_ appeared, it
would seem that Ibsen did not even send her a copy of the play; and we
gather that he was rather annoyed when she sent him a photograph signed
“Princess of Orangia.” On his seventieth birthday, however, she
telegraphed her congratulations, to which he returned a very cordial
reply. And here their relations ended.

That she was right, however, in regarding herself as his principal model
for Hilda, appears from an anecdote related by Dr. Elias.[8] It is not
an altogether pleasing anecdote, but Dr. Elias is an unexceptionable
witness, and it can by no means be omitted from an examination into the
origins of _The Master Builder_. Ibsen had come to Berlin in February
1891 for the first performance of _Hedda Gabler_. Such experiences were
always a trial to him, and he felt greatly relieved when they were over.
Packing, too, he detested; and Elias having helped him through this
terrible ordeal, the two sat down to lunch together, while awaiting the
train. An expansive mood descended upon Ibsen, and chuckling over his
champagne-glass, he said: ”Do you know, my next play is already hovering
before me—of course in vague outline. But of one thing I have got firm
hold. An experience: a woman’s figure. Very interesting, very
interesting indeed. Again spice of devilry in it.“ Then he related how
he had met in the Tyrol a Viennese girl of very remarkable character.
She had at once made him her confidant. The gist of her confessions was
that she did not care a bit about one day marrying a well brought-up
young man—most likely she would never marry. What tempted and charmed
and delighted her was to lure other women’s husbands away from them. She
was a little dæmonic wrecker; she often appeared to him like a little
bird of prey, that would fain have made him, too, her booty. He had
studied her very, very closely. For the rest, she had had no great
success with him. ”She did not get hold of me, but I got hold of her—for
my play. Then I fancy“ (here he chuckled again) “she consoled herself
with some one else.” Love seemed to mean for her only a sort of morbid
imagination. This, however, was only one side of her nature. His little
model had had a great deal of heart and of womanly understanding; and
thanks to the spontaneous power she could gain over him, every woman
might, if she wished it, guide some man towards the good. “Thus Ibsen
spoke,” says Elias, ”calmly and coolly, gazing as it were into the far
distance, like an artist taking an objective view of some
experience—like Rubek speaking of his soul-thefts. He had stolen a soul,
and put it to a double employment. Thea Elvsted and Hilda Wangel are
intimately related—are, indeed, only different expressions of the same
nature.“ If Ibsen actually declared Thea and Hilda to be drawn from one
model, we must of course take his word for it; but the relationship is
hard to discern.

There can be no reasonable doubt, then, that the Gossensass episode gave
the primary impulse to _The Master Builder_. But it seems pretty well
established, too, that another lady, whom he met in Christiania after
his return in 1891, also contributed largely to the character of Hilda.
This may have been the reason why he resented Fraülein Bardach’s
appropriating to herself the title of “Princess of Orangia.”

The play was published in the middle of December 1892. It was acted both
in Germany and England before it was seen in the Scandinavian capitals.
Its first performance took place at the Lessing Theatre, Berlin, January
19, 1893, with Emanuel Reicher as Solness and Frl. Reisenhofer as Hilda.
In London it was first performed at the Trafalgar Square Theatre (now
the Duke of York’s) on February 20, 1893, under the direction of Mr.
Herbert Waring and Miss Elizabeth Robins, who played Solness and Hilda.
This was one of the most brilliant and successful of English Ibsen
productions. Miss Robins was almost an ideal Hilda, and Mr. Waring’s
Solness was exceedingly able. Some thirty performances were given in
all, and the play was reproduced at the Opera Comique later in the
season, with Mr. Lewis Waller as Solness. In the following year Miss
Robins acted Hilda in Manchester. In Christiania and Copenhagen the play
was produced on the same evening, March 8, 1893; the Copenhagen Solness
and Hilda were Emil Poulsen and Fru Hennings. A Swedish production, by
Lindberg, soon followed, both in Stockholm and Gothenburg. In Paris
_Solness le constructeur_ was not seen until April 3, 1894, when it was
produced by “L’Œuvre” with M. Lugné-Poë as Solness. This company,
sometimes with Mme. Suzanne Desprès and sometimes with Mme. Berthe Bady
as Hilda, in 1894 and 1895 presented the play in London, Brussels,
Amsterdam, Milan, and other cities. In October 1894 they visited
Christiania, where Ibsen was present at one of their performances, and
is reported by Herman Bang to have been so enraptured with it that he
exclaimed, “This is the resurrection of my play!” On this occasion Mme.
Bady was the Hilda. The first performance of the play in America took
place at the Carnegie Lyceum, New York, on January 16, 1900, with Mr.
William H. Pascoe as Solness and Miss Florence Kahn as Hilda. The
performance was repeated in the course of the same month, both at
Washington and Boston.

In England, and probably elsewhere as well, _The Master Builder_
produced a curious double effect. It alienated many of the poet’s
staunchest admirers, and it powerfully attracted many people who had
hitherto been hostile to him. Looking back, it is easy to see why this
should have been so; for here was certainly a new thing in drama, which
could not but set up many novel reactions. A greater contrast could
scarcely be imagined than that between the hard, cold, precise outlines
of _Hedda Gabler_ and the vague mysterious atmosphere of _The Master
Builder_, in which, though the dialogue is sternly restrained within the
limits of prose, the art of drama seems for ever on the point of
floating away to blend with the art of music. Substantially, the play is
one long dialogue between Solness and Hilda; and it would be quite
possible to analyse this dialogue in terms of music, noting (for
example) the announcement first of this theme and then of that, the
resumption and reinforcement of a theme which seemed to have been
dropped, the contrapuntal interweaving of two or more motives, a scherzo
here, a fugal passage there. Leaving this exercise to someone more
skilled in music (or less unskilled) than myself, I may note that in
_The Master Builder_ Ibsen resumes his favourite retrospective method,
from which in _Hedda Gabler_ he had in great measure departed. But the
retrospect with which we are here concerned is purely psychological. The
external events involved in it are few and simple in comparison with the
external events which are successively unveiled in the retrospective
passages of _The Wild Duck_ or _Rosmersholm_. The matter of the play is
the soul-history of Halvard Solness, recounted to an impassioned
listener—so impassioned, indeed, that the soul-changes it begets in her
form an absorbing and thrilling drama. The graduations, retardations,
accelerations of Solness’s self-revealment are managed with the subtlest
art, so as to keep the interest of the spectator ever on the stretch.
The technical method was not new; it was simply that which Ibsen had
been perfecting from _Pillars of Society_ onward; but it was applied to
a subject of a nature not only new to him, but new to literature.

That the play is full of symbolism it would be futile to deny; and the
symbolism is mainly autobiographic. The churches which Solness sets out
by building doubtless represent Ibsen’s early romantic plays, the “homes
for human beings,” his social dramas; while the houses with high towers,
merging into “castles in the air,” stand for those spiritual dramas,
with a wide outlook over the metaphysical environment of humanity, on
which he was henceforth to be engaged. Perhaps it is not altogether
fanciful to read a personal reference into Solness’s refusal to call
himself an architect, on the ground that his training has not been
systematic—that he is a self-taught man. Ibsen too was in all essentials
self-taught; his philosophy was entirely unsystematic; and, like
Solness, he was no student of books. There may be an introspective note
also in that dread of the younger generation to which Solness confesses.
It is certain that the old Master Builder was not lavish of his
certificates of competence to young aspirants, though there is nothing
to show that his reticence ever depressed or quenched any rising genius.

On the whole, then, it cannot be doubted that several symbolic motives
are inwoven into the iridescent fabric of the play. But it is a great
mistake to regard it as essentially and inseparably a piece of
symbolism. Essentially it is the history of a sickly conscience, worked
out in terms of pure psychology. Or rather, it is a study of a sickly
and a robust conscience side by side. “The conscience is very
conservative,” Ibsen has somewhere said; and here Solness’s conservatism
is contrasted with Hilda’s radicalism—or rather would-be radicalism, for
we are led to suspect, towards the close, that the radical too is a
conservative in spite of herself. The fact that Solness cannot climb as
high as he builds implies, I take it, that he cannot act as freely as he
thinks, or as Hilda would goad him into thinking. At such an altitude
his conscience would turn dizzy, and life would become impossible to
him. But here I am straying back to the interpretation of symbols. My
present purpose is to insist that there is nothing in the play which has
no meaning on the natural-psychological plane, and absolutely requires a
symbolic interpretation to make it comprehensible. The symbols are
harmonic undertones; the psychological melody is clear and consistent
without any reference to them.[9] It is true that, in order to accept
the action on what we may call the realistic level, we must suppose
Solness to possess and to exercise, sometimes in spite of himself, and
sometimes unconsciously, a considerable measure of hypnotic power. But
the time is surely past when we could reckon hypnotism among
“supernatural” phenomena. Whether the particular forms of hypnotic
influence attributed to Solness do actually exist is a question we need
not determine. The poet does not demand our absolute credence, as though
he were giving evidence in the witness-box. What he requires is our
imaginative acceptance of certain incidents which he purposely leaves
hovering on the border between the natural and the preternatural, the
explained and the unexplained. In this play, as in _The Lady from the
Sea_ and _Little Eyolf_, he shows a delicacy of art in his dalliance
with the occult which irresistibly recalls the exquisite genius of
Nathaniel Hawthorne.[10]

The critics who insist on finding nothing but symbolism in the play have
fastened on Mrs. Solness’s “nine lovely dolls,” and provided the most
amazing interpretations for them. A letter contributed in 1893 to the
_Westminster Gazette_ records an incident which throws a curious light
on the subject, and may be worth preserving. “At a recent first-night,”
I wrote, ”I happened to be seated just behind a well-known critic. He
turned round to me and said, ‘I want you to tell me what is _your_
theory of those “nine lovely dolls.” Of course one can see that they are
entirely symbolical.’ ‘I am not so sure of that,’ I replied, remembering
a Norwegian cousin of my own who treasured a favourite doll until she
was nearer thirty than twenty. ‘They of course symbolise the unsatisfied
passion of motherhood in Mrs. Solness’s heart, but I have very little
doubt that Ibsen makes use of this “symbol” because he has observed a
similar case, or cases, in real life.’ ‘What!’ cried the critic. ‘He has
seen a grown-up, a middle-aged, woman continuing to “live with” her
dolls!’ I was about to say that it did not seem to me so very
improbable, when a lady who was seated next me, a total stranger to both
of us, leant forward and said, ‘Excuse my interrupting you, but it may
perhaps interest you to know that _I have three dolls to which I am
deeply attached!_’ I will not be so rude as to conjecture this lady’s
age, but we may be sure that a very young woman would not have had the
courage to make such an avowal. Does it not seem that Ibsen knows a
thing or two about human nature—English as well as Norwegian—which we
dramatic critics, though bound by our calling to be subtle
psychologists, have not yet fathomed?“ In the course of the
correspondence which followed, one very apposite anecdote was quoted
from an American paper, the _Argonaut_: “An old Virginia lady said to a
friend, on finding a treasured old cup cracked by a careless maid, ‘I
know of nothing to compare with the affliction of losing a handsome
piece of old china.’ ‘Surely,’ said the friend, ‘it is not so bad as
losing one’s children.’ ‘Yes, it is,’ replied the old lady, ’for when
your children die, you do have the consolations of religion, you know.’”

It would be a paradox to call _The Master Builder_ Ibsen’s greatest
work, but one of his three or four greatest it assuredly is. Of all his
writings, it is probably the most original, the most individual, the
most unlike any other drama by any other writer. The form of _Brand_ and
_Peer Gynt_ was doubtless suggested by other dramatic poems—notably by
_Faust_. In _The Wild Duck_, in _Rosmersholm_, in _Hedda Gabler_, even
in _Little Eyolf_ and _John Gabriel Borkman_, there remain faint traces
of the French leaven which was so strong in the earlier plays. But _The
Master Builder_ had no model and has no parallel. It shows no slightest
vestige of outside influence. It is Ibsen, and nothing but Ibsen.

-----

Footnote 6:

  ”To the May-sun of a September life—in Tyrol.“

Footnote 7:

  ”High, painful happiness—to struggle for the unattainable!“

Footnote 8:

  _Neue deutsche Rundschau_, December 1906, p. 1462.

Footnote 9:

  This conception I have worked out at much greater length in an essay,
  entitled _The Melody of the Master Builder_, appended to the shilling
  edition of the play, published in 1893. I there retell the story,
  transplanting it to England and making the hero a journalist instead
  of an architect, in order to show that (if we grant the reality of
  certain commonly-accepted phenomena of hypnotism) there is nothing
  incredible or even extravagantly improbable about it. The argument is
  far too long to be included here, but the reader who is interested in
  the subject may find it worth referring to.

Footnote 10:

  For an instance of the technical methods by which he suggested the
  supernormal element in the atmosphere of the play, see Introduction to
  _A Doll’s House_, p. xiv.




                              HEDDA GABLER

                                 (1890)




                              CHARACTERS.

 GEORGE TESMAN.[11]
 HEDDA TESMAN, _his wife_.
 MISS JULIANA TESMAN, _his aunt_.
 MRS. ELVSTED.
 JUDGE[12] BRACK.
 EILERT LÖVBORG.
 BERTA, _servant at the Tesmans_.

     _The scene of the action is Tesman’s villa, in the west end of
                             Christiania._

                             HEDDA GABLER.

                           PLAY IN FOUR ACTS.


                                -------




                               ACT FIRST.

_A spacious, handsome, and tastefully furnished drawing-room, decorated
      in dark colours. In the back, a wide doorway with curtains drawn
      back, leading into a smaller room decorated in the same style as
      the drawing-room. In the right-hand wall of the front room, a
      folding door leading out to the hall. In the opposite wall, on the
      left, a glass door, also with curtains drawn back. Through the
      panes can be seen part of a veranda outside, and trees covered
      with autumn foliage. An oval table, with a cover on it, and
      surrounded by chairs, stands well forward. In front, by the wall
      on the right, a wide stove of dark porcelain, a high-backed
      arm-chair, a cushioned foot-rest, and two footstools. A settee,
      with a small round table in front of it, fills the upper
      right-hand corner. In front, on the left, a little way from the
      wall, a sofa. Further back than the glass door, a piano. On either
      side of the doorway at the back a what-not with terra-cotta and
      majolica ornaments.—Against the back wall of the inner room a
      sofa, with a table, and one or two chairs. Over the sofa hangs the
      portrait of a handsome elderly man in a General’s uniform. Over
      the table a hanging lamp, with an opal glass shade.—A number of
      bouquets are arranged about the drawing-room, in vases and
      glasses. Others lie upon the tables. The floors in both rooms are
      covered with thick carpets.—Morning light. The sun shines in
      through the glass door._

_MISS JULIANA TESMAN, with her bonnet on and carrying a parasol, comes
      in from the hall, followed by BERTA, who carries a bouquet wrapped
      in paper. MISS TESMAN is a comely and pleasant-looking lady of
      about sixty-five. She is nicely but simply dressed in a grey
      walking-costume. BERTA is a middle-aged woman of plain and rather
      countrified appearance._

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_Stops close to the door, listens, and says softly_:] Upon my word, I
don’t believe they are stirring yet!

                                 BERTA.

[_Also softly._] I told you so, Miss. Remember how late the steamboat
got in last night. And then, when they got home!—good Lord, what a lot
the young mistress had to unpack before she could get to bed.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Well well—let them have their sleep out. But let us see that they get a
good breath of the fresh morning air when they do appear.

                       [_She goes to the glass door and throws it open._

                                 BERTA.

[_Beside the table, at a loss what to do with the bouquet in her hand._]
I declare there isn’t a bit of room left. I think I’ll put it down here,
Miss.

                                          [_She places it on the piano._

                              MISS TESMAN.

So you’ve got a new mistress now, my dear Berta. Heaven knows it was a
wrench to me to part with you.

                                 BERTA.

[_On the point of weeping._] And do you think it wasn’t hard for me too,
Miss? After all the blessed years I’ve been with you and Miss Rina.[13]

                              MISS TESMAN.

We must make the best of it, Berta. There was nothing else to be done.
George can’t do without you, you see—he absolutely can’t. He has had you
to look after him ever since he was a little boy.

                                 BERTA.

Ah but, Miss Julia, I can’t help thinking of Miss Rina lying helpless at
home there, poor thing. And with only that new girl too! _She’ll_ never
learn to take proper care of an invalid.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Oh, I shall manage to train her. And of course, you know, I shall take
most of it upon myself. You needn’t be uneasy about my poor sister, my
dear Berta.

                                 BERTA.

Well, but there’s another thing, Miss. I’m so mortally afraid I shan’t
be able to suit the young mistress.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Oh well—just at first there may be one or two things——

                                 BERTA.

Most like she’ll be terrible grand in her ways.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Well, you can’t wonder at that—General Gabler’s daughter! Think of the
sort of life she was accustomed to in her father’s time. Don’t you
remember how we used to see her riding down the road along with the
General? In that long black habit—and with feathers in her hat?

                                 BERTA.

Yes indeed—I remember well enough!—But, good Lord, I should never have
dreamt in those days that she and Master George would make a match of
it.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Nor I.—But by-the-bye, Berta—while I think of it: in future you mustn’t
say Master George. You must say Dr. Tesman.

                                 BERTA.

Yes, the young mistress spoke of that too—last night—the moment they set
foot in the house. Is it true then, Miss?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Yes, indeed it is. Only think, Berta—some foreign university has made
him a doctor—while he has been abroad, you understand. I hadn’t heard a
word about it, until he told me himself upon the pier.

                                 BERTA.

Well well, he’s clever enough for anything, he is. But I didn’t think
he’d have gone in for doctoring people too.

                              MISS TESMAN.

No no, it’s not that sort of doctor he is. [_Nods significantly._] But
let me tell you, we may have to call him something still grander before
long.

                                 BERTA.

You don’t say so! What can _that_ be, Miss?

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_Smiling._] H’m—wouldn’t you like to know! [_With emotion._] Ah, dear
dear—if my poor brother could only look up from his grave now, and see
what his little boy has grown into! [_Looks around._] But bless me,
Berta—why have you done _this_? Taken the chintz covers off all the
furniture?

                                 BERTA.

The mistress told me to. She can’t abide covers on the chairs, she says.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Are they going to make this their everyday sitting-room then?

                                 BERTA.

Yes, that’s what I understood—from the mistress. Master George—the
doctor—he said nothing.

_GEORGE TESMAN comes from the right into the inner room, humming to
    himself, and carrying an unstrapped empty portmanteau. He is a
    middle-sized, young-looking man of thirty-three, rather stout, with
    a round, open, cheerful face, fair hair and beard. He wears
    spectacles, and is somewhat carelessly dressed in comfortable indoor
    clothes._

                              MISS TESMAN.

Good morning, good morning, George.

                                TESMAN.

[_In the doorway between the rooms._] Aunt Julia! Dear Aunt Julia!
[_Goes up to her and shakes hands warmly._] Come all this way—so early!
Eh?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Why, of course I had to come and see how you were getting on.

                                TESMAN.

In spite of your having had no proper night’s rest?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Oh, that makes no difference to me.

                                TESMAN.

Well, I suppose you got home all right from the pier? Eh?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Yes, quite safely, thank goodness. Judge Brack was good enough to see me
right to my door.

                                TESMAN.

We were so sorry we couldn’t give you a seat in the carriage. But you
saw what a pile of boxes Hedda had to bring with her.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Yes, she had certainly plenty of boxes.

                                 BERTA.

[_To TESMAN._] Shall I go in and see if there’s anything I can do for
the mistress?

                                TESMAN.

No thank you, Berta—you needn’t. She said she would ring if she wanted
anything.

                                 BERTA.

[_Going towards the right._] Very well.

                                TESMAN.

But look here—take this portmanteau with you.

                                 BERTA.

[_Taking it._] I’ll put it in the attic.

                                       [_She goes out by the hall door._

                                TESMAN.

Fancy, Auntie—I had the whole of that portmanteau chock full of copies
of documents. You wouldn’t believe how much I have picked up from all
the archives I have been examining—curious old details that no one has
had any idea of——

                              MISS TESMAN.

Yes, you don’t seem to have wasted your time on your wedding trip,
George.

                                TESMAN.

No, that I haven’t. But do take off your bonnet, Auntie. Look here! Let
me untie the strings—eh?

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_While he does so._] Well well—this is just as if you were still at
home with us.

                                TESMAN.

[_With the bonnet in his hand, looks at it from all sides._] Why, what a
gorgeous bonnet you’ve been investing in!

                              MISS TESMAN.

I bought it on Hedda’s account.

                                TESMAN.

On Hedda’s account? Eh?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Yes, so that Hedda needn’t be ashamed of me if we happened to go out
together.

                                TESMAN.

[_Patting her cheek._] You always think of everything, Aunt Julia.
[_Lays the bonnet on a chair beside the table._] And now, look
here—suppose we sit comfortably on the sofa and have a little chat, till
Hedda comes.

[_They seat themselves. She places her parasol in the corner of the
    sofa._

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_Takes both his hands and looks at him._] What a delight it is to have
you again, as large as life, before my very eyes, George! My George—my
poor brother’s own boy!

                                TESMAN.

And it’s a delight for me, too, to see you again, Aunt Julia! You, who
have been father and mother in one to me.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Oh yes, I know you will always keep a place in your heart for your old
aunts.

                                TESMAN.

And what about Aunt Rina? No improvement—eh?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Oh no—we can scarcely look for any improvement in her case, poor thing.
There she lies, helpless, as she has lain for all these years. But
heaven grant I may not lose her yet awhile! For if I did, I don’t know
what I should make of my life, George—especially now that I haven’t you
to look after any more.

                                TESMAN.

[_Patting her back._] There there there——!

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_Suddenly changing her tone._] And to think that here are you a married
man, George!—And that _you_ should be the one to carry off Hedda
Gabler—the beautiful Hedda Gabler! Only think of it—she, that was so
beset with admirers!

                                TESMAN.

[_Hums a little and smiles complacently._] Yes, I fancy I have several
good friends about town who would like to stand in my shoes—eh?

                              MISS TESMAN.

And then this fine long wedding-tour you have had! More than five—nearly
six months——

                                TESMAN.

Well, for me it has been a sort of tour of research as well. I have had
to do so much grubbing among old records—and to read no end of books
too, Auntie.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Oh yes, I suppose so. [_More confidentially, and lowering her voice a
little._] But listen now, George,—have you nothing—nothing special to
tell me?

                                TESMAN.

As to our journey?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Yes.

                                TESMAN.

No, I don’t know of anything except what I have told you in my letters.
I had a doctor’s degree conferred on me—but that I told you yesterday.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Yes, yes, you did. But what I mean is—haven’t you
any—any—expectations——?

                                TESMAN.

Expectations?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Why you know, George—I’m your old auntie!

                                TESMAN.

Why, of course I have expectations.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Ah!

                                TESMAN.

I have every expectation of being a professor one of these days.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Oh yes, a professor——

                                TESMAN.

Indeed, I may say I am certain of it. But my dear Auntie—you know all
about that already!

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_Laughing to herself._] Yes, of course I do. You are quite right there.
[_Changing the subject._] But we were talking about your journey. It
must have cost a great deal of money, George?

                                TESMAN.

Well, you see—my handsome travelling-scholarship went a good way.

                              MISS TESMAN.

But I can’t understand how you can have made it go far enough for two.

                                TESMAN.

No, that’s not so easy to understand—eh?

                              MISS TESMAN.

And especially travelling with a lady—they tell me that makes it ever so
much more expensive.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, of course—it makes it a little more expensive. But Hedda _had_ to
have this trip, Auntie! She really _had_ to. Nothing else would have
done.

                              MISS TESMAN.

No no, I suppose not. A wedding-tour seems to be quite indispensable
nowadays.—But tell me now—have you gone thoroughly over the house yet?

                                TESMAN.

Yes, you may be sure I have. I have been afoot ever since daylight.

                              MISS TESMAN.

And what do you think of it all?

                                TESMAN.

I’m delighted! Quite delighted! Only I can’t think what we are to do
with the two empty rooms between this inner parlour and Hedda’s bedroom.

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_Laughing._] Oh my dear George, I daresay you may find some use for
them—in the course of time.

                                TESMAN.

Why of course you are quite right, Aunt Julia! You mean as my library
increases—eh?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Yes, quite so, my dear boy. It was your library I was thinking of.

                                TESMAN.

I am specially pleased on Hedda’s account. Often and often, before we
were engaged, she said that she would never care to live anywhere but in
Secretary Falk’s villa.[14]

                              MISS TESMAN.

Yes, it was lucky that this very house should come into the market, just
after you had started.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, Aunt Julia, the luck was on our side, wasn’t it——eh?

                              MISS TESMAN.

But the expense, my dear George. You will find it very expensive, all
this.

                                TESMAN.

[_Looks at her, a little cast down._] Yes, I suppose I shall, Aunt!

                              MISS TESMAN.

Oh, frightfully!

                                TESMAN.

How much do you think? In round numbers?—Eh?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Oh, I can’t even guess until all the accounts come in.

                                TESMAN.

Well, fortunately, Judge Brack has secured the most favourable terms for
me,—so he said in a letter to Hedda.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Yes, don’t be uneasy, my dear boy.—Besides, I have given security for
the furniture and all the carpets.

                                TESMAN.

Security? You? My dear Aunt Julia—what sort of security could _you_
give?

                              MISS TESMAN.

I have given a mortgage on our annuity.

                                TESMAN.

[_Jumps up._] What! On your—and Aunt Rina’s annuity!

                              MISS TESMAN.

Yes, I knew of no other plan, you see.

                                TESMAN.

[_Placing himself before her._] Have you gone out of your senses,
Auntie! Your annuity—it’s all that you and Aunt Rina have to live upon.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Well well—don’t get so excited about it. It’s only a matter of form you
know—Judge Brack assured me of that. It was he that was kind enough to
arrange the whole affair for me. A mere matter of form, he said.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, that may be all very well. But nevertheless——

                              MISS TESMAN.

You will have your own salary to depend upon now. And, good heavens,
even if we did have to pay up a little——! To eke things out a bit at the
start——! Why, it would be nothing but a pleasure to us.

                                TESMAN.

Oh Auntie—will you never be tired of making sacrifices for me!

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_Rises and lays her hand on his shoulders._] Have I any other happiness
in this world except to smooth your way for you, my dear boy? You, who
have had neither father nor mother to depend on. And now we have reached
the goal, George! Things have looked black enough for us, sometimes;
but, thank heaven, now you have nothing to fear.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, it is really marvellous how everything has turned out for the best.

                              MISS TESMAN.

And the people who opposed you—who wanted to bar the way for you—now you
have them at your feet. They have fallen, George. Your most dangerous
rival—his fall was the worst.—And now he has to lie on the bed he has
made for himself—poor misguided creature.

                                TESMAN.

Have you heard anything of Eilert? Since I went away, I mean.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Only that he is said to have published a new book.

                                TESMAN.

What! Eilert Lövborg! Recently—eh?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Yes, so they say. Heaven knows whether it can be worth anything! Ah,
when _your_ new book appears—that will be another story, George! What is
it to be about?

                                TESMAN.

It will deal with the domestic industries of Brabant during the Middle
Ages.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Fancy—to be able to write on such a subject as that!

                                TESMAN.

However, it may be some time before the book is ready. I have all these
collections to arrange first, you see.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Yes, collecting and arranging—no one can beat you at that. There you are
my poor brother’s own son.

                                TESMAN.

I am looking forward eagerly to setting to work at it; especially now
that I have my own delightful home to work in.

                              MISS TESMAN.

And, most of all, now that you have got the wife of your heart, my dear
George.

                                TESMAN.

[_Embracing her._] Oh yes, yes, Aunt Julia! Hedda—she is the best part
of it all! [_Looks towards the doorway._] I believe I hear her
coming—eh?

_HEDDA enters from the left through the inner room. She is a woman of
    nine-and-twenty. Her face and figure show refinement and
    distinction. Her complexion is pale and opaque. Her steel-grey eyes
    express a cold, unruffled repose. Her hair is of an agreeable medium
    brown, but not particularly abundant. She is dressed in a tasteful,
    somewhat loose-fitting morning gown._

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_Going to meet HEDDA._] Good morning, my dear Hedda! Good morning, and
a hearty welcome!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Holds out her hand._] Good morning, dear Miss Tesman! So early a call!
That is kind of you.

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_With some embarrassment._] Well—has the bride slept well in her new
home?

                                 HEDDA.

Oh yes, thanks. Passably.

                                TESMAN.

[_Laughing._] Passably! Come, that’s good, Hedda! You were sleeping like
a stone when I got up.

                                 HEDDA.

Fortunately. Of course one has always to accustom one’s self to new
surroundings, Miss Tesman—little by little. [LOOKING TOWARDS THE LEFT.]
Oh—there the servant has gone and opened the veranda door, and let in a
whole flood of sunshine.

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_Going towards the door._] Well, then we will shut it.

                                 HEDDA.

No no, not that! Tesman, please draw the curtains. That will give a
softer light.

                                TESMAN.

[_At the door._] All right—all right.—There now, Hedda, now you have
both shade and fresh air.

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, fresh air we certainly must have, with all these stacks of
flowers——. But—won’t you sit down, Miss Tesman?

                              MISS TESMAN.

No, thank you. Now that I have seen that everything is all right
here—thank heaven!—I must be getting home again. My sister is lying
longing for me, poor thing.

                                TESMAN.

Give her my very best love, Auntie; and say I shall look in and see her
later in the day.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Yes, yes, I’ll be sure to tell her. But by-the-bye, George—[_Feeling in
her dress pocket_]—I had almost forgotten—I have something for you here.

                                TESMAN.

What is it, Auntie? Eh?

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_Produces a flat parcel wrapped in newspaper and hands it to him._]
Look here, my dear boy.

                                TESMAN.

[_Opening the parcel._] Well, I declare!—Have you really saved them for
me, Aunt Julia! Hedda! isn’t this touching—eh?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Beside the whatnot on the right._] Well, what is it?

                                TESMAN.

My old morning-shoes! My slippers.

                                 HEDDA.

Indeed. I remember you often spoke of them while we were abroad.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, I missed them terribly. [_Goes up to her._] Now you shall see them,
Hedda!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Going towards the stove._] Thanks, I really don’t care about it.

                                TESMAN.

[_Following her._] Only think—ill as she was, Aunt Rina embroidered
these for me. Oh you can’t think how many associations cling to them.

                                 HEDDA.

[_At the table._] Scarcely for me.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Of course not for Hedda, George.

                                TESMAN.

Well, but now that she belongs to the family, I thought——

                                 HEDDA.

[_Interrupting._] We shall never get on with this servant, Tesman.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Not get on with Berta?

                                TESMAN.

Why, dear, what puts _that_ in your head? Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Pointing._] Look there! She has left her old bonnet lying about on a
chair.

                                TESMAN.

[_In consternation, drops the slippers on the floor._] ] Why, Hedda——

                                 HEDDA.

Just fancy, if any one should come in and see it!

                                TESMAN.

But Hedda—that’s Aunt Julia’s bonnet.

                                 HEDDA.

Is it!

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_Taking up the bonnet._] Yes, indeed it’s mine. And, what’s more, it’s
not old, Madam Hedda.

                                 HEDDA.

I really did not look closely at it, Miss Tesman.

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_Trying on the bonnet._] Let me tell you it’s the first time I have
worn it—the very first time.

                                TESMAN.

And a very nice bonnet it is too—quite a beauty!

                              MISS TESMAN.

Oh, it’s no such great things, George. [_Looks around her._] My
parasol——? Ah, here. [_Takes it._] For this is mine too—[_mutters_]—not
Berta’s.

                                TESMAN.

A new bonnet and a new parasol! Only think, Hedda!

                                 HEDDA.

Very handsome indeed.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, isn’t it? Eh? But Auntie, take a good look at Hedda before you go!
See how handsome _she_ is!

                              MISS TESMAN.

Oh, my dear boy, there’s nothing new in _that_. Hedda was always lovely.

                                 [_She nods and goes towards the right._

                                TESMAN.

[_Following._] Yes, but have you noticed what splendid condition she is
in? How she has filled out on the journey?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Crossing the room._] Oh, do be quiet——!

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_Who has stopped and turned._] Filled out?

                                TESMAN.

Of course you don’t notice it so much now that she has that dress on.
But I, who can see——

                                 HEDDA.

[_At the glass door, impatiently._] Oh, you can’t see anything.

                                TESMAN.

It must be the mountain air in the Tyrol——

                                 HEDDA.

[_Curtly, interrupting._] I am exactly as I was when I started.

                                TESMAN.

So you insist; but I’m quite certain you are not. Don’t you agree with
me, Auntie?

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_Who has been gazing at her with folded hands._] Hedda is
lovely—lovely—lovely. [_Goes up to her, takes her head between both
hands, draws it downwards, and kisses her hair._] God bless and preserve
Hedda Tesman—for George’s sake.

                                 HEDDA.

_[Gently freeing herself._] Oh—! Let me go.

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_In quiet emotion._] I shall not let a day pass without coming to see
you.

                                TESMAN.

No you won’t, will you, Auntie? Eh?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Good-bye—good-bye!

[_She goes out by the hall door. TESMAN accompanies her. The door
    remains half open. TESMAN can be heard repeating his message to Aunt
    Rina and his thanks for the slippers._

[_In the meantime, HEDDA walks about the room, raising her arms and
    clenching her hands as if in desperation. Then she flings back the
    curtains from the glass door, and stands there looking out._

[_Presently TESMAN returns and closes the door behind him._

                                TESMAN.

[_Picks up the slippers from the floor._] What are you looking at,
Hedda?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Once more calm and mistress of herself._] I am only looking at the
leaves. They are so yellow—so withered.

                                TESMAN.

[_Wraps up the slippers and lays them on the table._] Well you see, we
are well into September now.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Again restless._] Yes, to think of it!—Already in—in September.

                                TESMAN.

Don’t you think Aunt Julia’s manner was strange, dear? Almost solemn?
Can you imagine what was the matter with her? Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

I scarcely know her, you see. Is she not often like that?

                                TESMAN.

No, not as she was to-day.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Leaving the glass door._] Do you think she was annoyed about the
bonnet?

TESMAN.

Oh, scarcely at all. Perhaps a little, just at the moment——

                                 HEDDA.

But what an idea, to pitch her bonnet about in the drawing-room! No one
does that sort of thing.

                                TESMAN.

Well you may be sure Aunt Julia won’t do it again.

                                 HEDDA.

In any case, I shall manage to make my peace with her.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, my dear, good Hedda, if you only would.

                                 HEDDA.

When you call this afternoon, you might invite her to spend the evening
here.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, that I will. And there’s one thing more you could do that would
delight her heart.

                                 HEDDA.

What is it?

                                TESMAN.

If you could only prevail on yourself to say _du_[15] to her. For my
sake, Hedda? Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

No no, Tesman—you really mustn’t ask that of me. I have told you so
already. I shall try to call her “Aunt”; and you must be satisfied with
that.

                                TESMAN.

Well well. Only I think now that you belong to the family, you——

                                 HEDDA.

H’m—I can’t in the least see why——

                              [_She goes up towards the middle doorway._

                                TESMAN.

[_After a pause._] Is there anything the matter with you, Hedda? Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

I’m only looking at my old piano. It doesn’t go at all well with all the
other things.

                                TESMAN.

The first time I draw my salary, we’ll see about exchanging it.

                                 HEDDA.

No, no—no exchanging. I don’t want to part with it. Suppose we put it
there in the inner room, and then get another here in its place. When
it’s convenient, I mean.

                                TESMAN.

[_A little taken aback._] Yes—of course we could do that.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Takes up the bouquet from the piano._] These flowers were not here
last night when we arrived.

                                TESMAN.

Aunt Julia must have brought them for you.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Examining the bouquet._] A visiting-card. [_Takes it out and reads_:]
“Shall return later in the day.” Can you guess whose card it is?

                                TESMAN.

No. Whose? Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

The name is “Mrs. Elvsted.”

                                TESMAN.

Is it really? Sheriff Elvsted’s wife? Miss Rysing that was.

                                 HEDDA.

Exactly. The girl with the irritating hair, that she was always showing
off. An old flame of yours I’ve been told.

                                TESMAN.

[_Laughing._] Oh, that didn’t last long; and it was before I knew you,
Hedda. But fancy her being in town!

                                 HEDDA.

It’s odd that she should call upon us. I have scarcely seen her since we
left school.

                                TESMAN.

I haven’t seen her either for—heaven knows how long. I wonder how she
can endure to live in such an out-of-the way hole—eh?

                                 HEDDA.

[_After a moment’s thought, says suddenly._] Tell me, Tesman—isn’t it
somewhere near there that he—that—Eilert Lövborg is living?

                                TESMAN.

Yes, he is somewhere in that part of the country.

                    _BERTA enters by the hall door._

                                 BERTA.

That lady, ma’am, that brought some flowers a little while ago, is here
again. [_Pointing._] The flowers you have in your hand, ma’am.

                                 HEDDA.

Ah, is she? Well, please show her in.

BERTA _opens the door for_ MRS. ELVSTED, _and goes out herself._—MRS.
    ELVSTED _is a woman of fragile figure, with pretty, soft features.
    Her eyes are light blue, large, round, and somewhat prominent, with
    a startled, inquiring expression. Her hair is remarkably light,
    almost flaxen, and unusually abundant and wavy. She is a couple of
    years younger than_ HEDDA. _She wears a dark visiting dress,
    tasteful, but not quite in the latest fashion._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Receives her warmly._] How do you do, my dear Mrs. Elvsted? It’s
delightful to see you again.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Nervously, struggling for self-control._] Yes, it’s a very long time
since we met.

                                TESMAN.

[_Gives her his hand._] And we too—eh?

                                 HEDDA.

Thanks for your lovely flowers——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, not at all——. I would have come straight here yesterday afternoon;
but I heard that you were away——

                                TESMAN.

Have you just come to town? Eh?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

I arrived yesterday, about midday. Oh, I was quite in despair when I
heard that you were not at home.

                                 HEDDA.

In despair! How so?

                                TESMAN.

Why, my dear Mrs. Rysing—I mean Mrs. Elvsted——

                                 HEDDA.

I hope that you are not in any trouble?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, I am. And I don’t know another living creature here that I can turn
to.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Laying the bouquet on the table._] Come—let us sit here on the sofa——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, I am too restless to sit down.

                                 HEDDA.

Oh no, you’re not. Come here.

          [_She draws MRS. ELVSTED down upon the sofa and sits at her
            side._

                                TESMAN.

Well? What is it, Mrs. Elvsted——?

                                 HEDDA.

Has anything particular happened to you at home?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes—and no. Oh—I am so anxious you should not misunderstand me——

                                 HEDDA.

Then your best plan is to tell us the whole story, Mrs. Elvsted.

                                TESMAN.

I suppose that’s what you have come for—eh?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, yes—of course it is. Well then, I must tell you—if you don’t
already know—that Eilert Lövborg is in town, too.

                                 HEDDA.

Lövborg——!

                                TESMAN.

What! Has Eilert Lövborg come back? Fancy that, Hedda!

                                 HEDDA.

Well well—I hear it.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

He has been here a week already. Just fancy—a whole week! In this
terrible town, alone! With so many temptations on all sides.

                                 HEDDA.

But, my dear Mrs. Elvsted—how does he concern you so much?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Looks at her with a startled air, and says rapidly._] He was the
children’s tutor.

                                 HEDDA.

Your children’s?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

My husband’s. I have none.

                                 HEDDA.

Your step-children’s, then?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes.

                                TESMAN.

[_Somewhat hesitatingly._] Then was he—I don’t know how to express
it—was he—regular enough in his habits to be fit for the post? Eh?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

For the last two years his conduct has been irreproachable.

                                TESMAN.

Has it indeed? Fancy that, Hedda!

                                 HEDDA.

I hear it.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Perfectly irreproachable, I assure you! In every respect. But all the
same—now that I know he is here—in this great town—and with a large sum
of money in his hands—I can’t help being in mortal fear for him.

                                TESMAN.

Why did he not remain where he was? With you and your husband? Eh?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

After his book was published he was too restless and unsettled to remain
with us.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, by-the-bye, Aunt Julia told me he had published a new book.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, a big book, dealing with the march of civilisation—in broad
outline, as it were. It came out about a fortnight ago. And since it has
sold so well, and been so much read—and made such a sensation——

                                TESMAN.

Has it indeed? It must be something he has had lying by since his better
days.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Long ago, you mean?

                                TESMAN.

Yes.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

No, he has written it all since he has been with us—within the last
year.

                                TESMAN.

Isn’t that good news, Hedda? Think of that!

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Ah yes, if only it would last!

                                 HEDDA.

Have you seen him here in town?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

No, not yet. I have had the greatest difficulty in finding out his
address. But this morning I discovered it at last.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looks searchingly at her._] Do you know, it seems to me a little odd
of your husband—h’m——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Starting nervously._] Of my husband! What?

                                 HEDDA.

That he should send you to town on such an errand—that he does not come
himself and look after his friend.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh no, no—my husband has no time. And besides, I—I had some shopping to
do.

                                 HEDDA.

[_With a slight smile._] Ah, that is a different matter.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Rising quickly and uneasily._] And now I beg and implore you, Mr.
Tesman—receive Eilert Lövborg kindly if he comes to you! And that he is
sure to do. You see you were such great friends in the old days. And
then you are interested in the same studies—the same branch of
science—so far as I can understand.

                                TESMAN.

We used to be, at any rate.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

That is why I beg so earnestly that you—you too—will keep a sharp eye
upon him. Oh, you will promise me that, Mr. Tesman—won’t you?

                                TESMAN.

With the greatest of pleasure, Mrs. Rysing——

                                 HEDDA.

Elvsted.

                                TESMAN.

I assure you I shall do all I possibly can for Eilert. You may rely upon
me.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, how very, very kind of you! [_Presses his hands._] Thanks, thanks,
thanks! _[Frightened._] You see, my husband is so very fond of him!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Rising._] You ought to write to him, Tesman. Perhaps he may not care
to come to you of his own accord.

                                TESMAN.

Well, perhaps it would be the right thing to do, Hedda? Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

And the sooner the better. Why not at once?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Imploringly._] Oh, if you only would!

                                TESMAN.

I’ll write this moment. Have you his address, Mrs.—Mrs. Elvsted.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes. [_Takes a slip of paper from her pocket, and hands it to him._]
Here it is.

                                TESMAN.

Good, good. Then I’ll go in——[_Looks about him._] By-the-bye,—my
slippers? Oh, here.

                                [_Takes the packet, and is about to go._

                                 HEDDA.

Be sure you write him a cordial, friendly letter. And a good long one
too.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, I will.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

But please, please don’t say a word to show that I have suggested it.

                                TESMAN.

No, how could you think I would? Eh?

      [_He goes out to the right, through the inner room._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Goes up to MRS. ELVSTED, smiles, and says in a low voice._] There! We
have killed two birds with one stone.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

What do you mean?

                                 HEDDA.

Could you not see that I wanted him to go?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, to write the letter——

                                 HEDDA.

And that I might speak to you alone.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Confused._] About the same thing?

                                 HEDDA.

Precisely.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Apprehensively._] But there is nothing more Mrs. Tesman! Absolutely
nothing!

                                 HEDDA.

Oh yes, but there is. There is a great deal more—I can see that. Sit
here—and we’ll have a cosy, confidential chat.

          [_She forces_ MRS. ELVSTED _to sit in the easy-chair beside
            the stove, and seats herself on one of the footstools._

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Anxiously, looking at her watch._] But, my dear Mrs. Tesman—I was
really on the point of going.

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, you can’t be in such a hurry.—Well? Now tell me something about your
life at home.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, that is just what I care least to speak about.

                                 HEDDA.

But to me, dear——? Why, weren’t we schoolfellows?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, but you were in the class above me. Oh, how dreadfully afraid of
you I was then!

                                 HEDDA.

Afraid of me?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, dreadfully. For when we met on the stairs you used always to pull
my hair.

                                 HEDDA.

Did I, really?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, and once you said you would burn it off my head.

                                 HEDDA.

Oh that was all nonsense, of course.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, but I was so silly in those days.—And since then, too—we have
drifted so far—far apart from each other. Our circles have been so
entirely different.

                                 HEDDA.

Well then, we must try to drift together again. Now listen! At school we
said _du_[16] to each other; and we called each other by our Christian
names——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

No, I am sure you must be mistaken.

                                 HEDDA.

No, not at all! I can remember quite distinctly. So now we are going to
renew our old friendship. [_Draws the footstool closer to MRS.
ELVSTED._] There now! [_Kisses her cheek._] You must say _du_ to me and
call me Hedda.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Presses and pats her hands._] Oh, how good and kind you are! I am not
used to such kindness.

                                 HEDDA.

There, there, there! And I shall say _du_ to you, as in the old days,
and call you my dear Thora.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

My name is Thea.[17]

                                 HEDDA.

Why, of course! I meant Thea. [_Looks at her compassionately._] So you
are not accustomed to goodness and kindness, Thea? Not in your own home?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, if I only had a home! But I haven’t any; I have never had a home.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looks at her for a moment._] I almost suspected as much.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Gazing helplessly before her._] Yes—yes—yes.

                                 HEDDA.

I don’t quite remember—was it not as housekeeper that you first went to
Mr. Elvsted’s?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

I really went as governess. But his wife—his late wife—was an
invalid,—and rarely left her room. So I had to look after the
housekeeping as well.

                                 HEDDA.

And then—at last—you became mistress of the house.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Sadly._] Yes, I did.

                                 HEDDA.

Let me see—about how long ago was that?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

My marriage?

                                 HEDDA.

Yes.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Five years ago.

                                 HEDDA.

To be sure; it must be that.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh those five years——! Or at all events the last two or three of them!
Oh, if you[18] could only imagine——

                                 HEDDA.

[_Giving her a little slap on the hand._] _De?_ Fie, Thea!

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, yes, I will try——Well, if—you could only imagine and understand——

                                 HEDDA.

[_Lightly._] Eilert Lövborg has been in your neighbourhood about three
years, hasn’t he?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Looks at her doubtfully._] Eilert Lövborg? Yes—he has.

                                 HEDDA.

Had you known him before, in town here?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Scarcely at all. I mean—I knew him by name of course.

                                 HEDDA.

But you saw a good deal of him in the country?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, he came to us every day. You see, he gave the children lessons; for
in the long run I couldn’t manage it all myself.

                                 HEDDA.

No, that’s clear.—And your husband——? I suppose he is often away from
home?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes. Being sheriff, you know, he has to travel about a good deal in his
district.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Leaning against the arm of the chair._] Thea—my poor, sweet Thea—now
you must tell me everything—exactly as it stands.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Well then, you must question me.

                                 HEDDA.

What sort of a man is your husband, Thea? I mean—you know—in everyday
life. Is he kind to you?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Evasively._] I am sure he means well in everything.

                                 HEDDA.

I should think he must be altogether too old for you. There is at least
twenty years’ difference between you, is there not?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Irritably._] Yes, that is true, too. Everything about him is repellent
to me! We have not a thought in common. We have no single point of
sympathy—he and I.

                                 HEDDA.

But is he not fond of you all the same? In his own way?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh I really don’t know. I think he regards me simply as a useful
property. And then it doesn’t cost much to keep me. I am not expensive.

                                 HEDDA.

That is stupid of you.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Shakes her head._] It cannot be otherwise—not with him. I don’t think
he really cares for any one but himself—and perhaps a little for the
children.

                                 HEDDA.

And for Eilert Lövborg, Thea.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Looking at her._] For Eilert Lövborg? What puts that into your head?

                                 HEDDA.

Well, my dear—I should say, when he sends you after him all the way to
town——[_Smiling almost imperceptibly._] And besides, you said so
yourself, to Tesman.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_With a little nervous twitch._] Did I? Yes, I suppose I did.
[_Vehemently, but not loudly._] No—I may just as well make a clean
breast of it at once! For it must all come out in any case.

                                 HEDDA.

Why, my dear Thea——?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Well, to make a long story short: My husband did not know that I was
coming.

                                 HEDDA.

What! Your husband didn’t know it!

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

No, of course not. For that matter, he was away from home himself—he was
travelling. Oh, I could bear it no longer, Hedda! I couldn’t indeed—so
utterly alone as I should have been in future.

                                 HEDDA.

Well? And then?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

So I put together some of my things—what I needed most—as quietly as
possible. And then I left the house.

                                 HEDDA.

Without a word?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes—and took the train straight to town.

                                 HEDDA.

Why, my dear, good Thea—to think of you daring to do it!

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Rises and moves about the room._] What else could I possibly do?

                                 HEDDA.

But what do you think your husband will say when you go home again?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_At the table, looks at her._] Back to _him_?

                                 HEDDA.

Of course.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

I shall never go back to him again.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Rising and going towards her._] Then you have left your home—for good
and all?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes. There was nothing else to be done.

                                 HEDDA.

But then—to take flight so openly

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, it’s impossible to keep things of that sort secret.

                                 HEDDA.

But what do you think people will say of you, Thea?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

They may say what they like, for aught _I_ care. [_Seats herself wearily
and sadly on the sofa._] I have done nothing but what I _had_ to do.

                                 HEDDA.

[_After a short silence._] And what are your plans now? What do you
think of doing?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

I don’t know yet. I only know this, that I _must_ live here, where
Eilert Lövborg is—if I am to live at all.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Takes a chair from the table, seats herself beside her, and strokes
her hands._] My dear Thea—how did this—this friendship—between you and
Eilert Lövborg come about?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh it grew up gradually. I gained a sort of influence over him.

                                 HEDDA.

Indeed?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

He gave up his old habits. Not because I asked him to, for I never dared
do that. But of course he saw how repulsive they were to me; and so he
dropped them.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Concealing an involuntary smile of scorn._] Then you have reclaimed
him—as the saying goes—my little Thea.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

So he says himself, at any rate. And he, on his side, has made a real
human being of me—taught me to think, and to understand so many things.

                                 HEDDA.

Did he give _you_ lessons too, then?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

No, not exactly lessons. But he talked to me—talked about such an
infinity of things. And then came the lovely, happy time when I began to
share in his work—when he allowed me to help him!

                                 HEDDA.

Oh he did, did he?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes! He never wrote anything without my assistance.

                                 HEDDA.

You were two good comrades, in fact?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Eagerly._] Comrades! Yes, fancy, Hedda—that is the very word he
used!—Oh, I ought to feel perfectly happy; and yet I cannot; for I don’t
know how long it will last.

                                 HEDDA.

Are you no surer of him than that?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Gloomily._] A woman’s shadow stands between Eilert Lövborg and me.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looks at her anxiously._] Who can _that_ be?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

I don’t know. Some one he knew in his—in his past. Some one he has never
been able wholly to forget.

                                 HEDDA.

What has he told you—about this?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

He has only once—quite vaguely—alluded to it.

                                 HEDDA.

Well! And what did he say?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

He said that when they parted, she threatened to shoot him with a
pistol.

                                 HEDDA.

[_With cold composure._] Oh nonsense! No one does that sort of thing
here.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

No. And that is why I think it must have been that red-haired
singing-woman whom he once——

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, very likely.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

For I remember they used to say of her that she carried loaded firearms.

                                 HEDDA.

Oh—then of course it must have been she.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Wringing her hands._] And now just fancy, Hedda—I hear that this
singing-woman—that she is in town again! Oh, I don’t know what to do——

                                 HEDDA.

[_Glancing towards the inner room._] Hush! Here comes Tesman. [_Rises
and whispers._] Thea—all this must remain between you and me.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Springing up._] Oh yes—yes! For heaven’s sake——!

GEORGE TESMAN, _with a letter in his hand, comes from the right through
    the inner room._

                                TESMAN.

There now—the epistle is finished.

                                 HEDDA.

That’s right. And now Mrs. Elvsted is just going. Wait a moment—I’ll go
with you to the garden gate.

                                TESMAN.

Do you think Berta could post the letter, Hedda dear?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Takes it._] I will tell her to.

                     BERTA _enters from the hall._

                                 BERTA.

Judge Brack wishes to know if Mrs. Tesman will receive him.

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, ask Judge Brack to come in. And look here—put this letter in the
post.

                                 BERTA.

[_Taking the letter._] Yes, ma’am.

          [_She opens the door for_ JUDGE BRACK _and goes out herself._
            BRACK _is a man of forty-five; thick set, but well-built and
            elastic in his movements. His face is roundish with an
            aristocratic profile. His hair is short, still almost black,
            and carefully dressed. His eyes are lively and sparkling.
            His eyebrows thick. His moustaches are also thick, with
            short-cut ends. He wears a well-cut walking-suit, a little
            too youthful for his age. He uses an eye-glass, which he now
            and then lets drop._

                              JUDGE BRACK.

[_With his hat in his hand, bowing._] May one venture to call so early
in the day?

                                 HEDDA.

Of course one may.

                                TESMAN.

[_Presses his hand._] You are welcome at any time. [_Introducing him._]
Judge Brack—Miss Rysing——

                                 HEDDA.

Oh——!

                                 BRACK.

[_Bowing._] Ah—delighted——

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looks at him and laughs._] It’s nice to have a look at you by
daylight, Judge!

                                 BRACK.

Do you find me—altered?

                                 HEDDA.

A little younger, I think.

                                 BRACK.

Thank you so much.

                                TESMAN.

But what do you think of Hedda—eh? Doesn’t she look flourishing? She has
actually——

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, do leave me alone. You haven’t thanked Judge Brack for all the
trouble he has taken——

                                 BRACK.

Oh, nonsense—it was a pleasure to me——

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, you are a friend indeed. But here stands Thea all impatience to be
off—so _au revoir_ Judge. I shall be back again presently.

          [_Mutual salutations. MRS. ELVSTED and HEDDA go out by the
            hall door._

                                 BRACK.

Well,—is your wife tolerably satisfied——

                                TESMAN.

Yes, we can’t thank you sufficiently. Of course she talks of a little
re-arrangement here and there; and one or two things are still wanting.
We shall have to buy some additional trifles.

                                 BRACK.

Indeed!

                                TESMAN.

But we won’t trouble you about these things. Hedda says she herself will
look after what is wanting.—Shan’t we sit down? Eh?

                                 BRACK.

Thanks, for a moment. [_Seats himself beside the table._] There is
something I wanted to speak to you about, my dear Tesman.

                                TESMAN.

Indeed? Ah, I understand! [_Seating himself._] I suppose it’s the
serious part of the frolic that is coming now. Eh?

                                 BRACK.

Oh, the money question is not so very pressing; though, for that matter,
I wish we had gone a little more economically to work.

                                TESMAN.

But that would never have done, you know! Think of Hedda, my dear
fellow! You, who know her so well——. I couldn’t possibly ask her to put
up with a shabby style of living!

                                 BRACK.

No, no—that is just the difficulty.

                                TESMAN.

And then—fortunately—it can’t be long before I receive my appointment.

                                 BRACK.

Well, you see—such things are often apt to hang fire for a time.

                                TESMAN.

Have you heard anything definite? Eh?

                                 BRACK.

Nothing exactly definite——. [_Interrupting himself._] But by-the-bye—I
have one piece of news for you.

                                TESMAN.

Well?

                                 BRACK.

Your old friend, Eilert Lövborg, has returned to town.

                                TESMAN.

I know that already.

                                 BRACK.

Indeed! How did you learn it?

                                TESMAN.

From that lady who went out with Hedda.

                                 BRACK.

Really? What was her name? I didn’t quite catch it.

                                TESMAN.

Mrs. Elvsted.

                                 BRACK.

Aha—Sheriff Elvsted’s wife? Of course—he has been living up in their
regions.

                                TESMAN.

And fancy—I’m delighted to hear that he is quite a reformed character!

                                 BRACK.

So they say.

                                TESMAN.

And then he has published a new book—eh?

                                 BRACK.

Yes, indeed he has.

                                TESMAN.

And I hear it has made some sensation!

                                 BRACK.

Quite an unusual sensation.

                                TESMAN.

Fancy—isn’t that good news! A man of such extraordinary talents——. I
felt so grieved to think that he had gone irretrievably to ruin.

                                 BRACK.

That was what everybody thought.

                                TESMAN.

But I cannot imagine what he will take to now! How in the world will he
be able to make his living? Eh?

                [_During the last words,_ HEDDA _has entered by the hall
                  door._

                                 HEDDA.

[_To BRACK, laughing with a touch of scorn._] Tesman is for ever
worrying about how people are to make their living.

                                TESMAN.

Well you see, dear—we were talking about poor Eilert Lövborg.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Glancing at him rapidly._] Oh, indeed? [_Seats herself in the
arm-chair beside the stove and asks indifferently_:] What is the matter
with _him_?

                                TESMAN.

Well—no doubt he has run through all his property long ago; and he can
scarcely write a new book every year—eh? So I really can’t see what is
to become of him.

                                 BRACK.

Perhaps I can give you some information on that point.

                                TESMAN.

Indeed!

                                 BRACK.

You must remember that his relations have a good deal of influence.

                                TESMAN.

Oh, his relations, unfortunately, have entirely washed their hands of
him.

                                 BRACK.

At one time they called him the hope of the family.

                                TESMAN.

At one time, yes! But he has put an end to all that.

                                 HEDDA.

Who knows? [_With a slight smile._] I hear they have reclaimed him up at
Sheriff Elvsted’s——

                                 BRACK.

And then this book that he has published——

                                TESMAN.

Well well, I hope to goodness they may find something for him to do. I
have just written to him. I asked him to come and see us this evening,
Hedda dear.

                                 BRACK.

But my dear fellow, you are booked for my bachelors’ party this evening.
You promised on the pier last night.

                                 HEDDA.

Had you forgotten, Tesman?

                                TESMAN.

Yes, I had utterly forgotten.

                                 BRACK.

But it doesn’t matter, for you may be sure he won’t come.

                                TESMAN.

What makes you think that? Eh?

                                 BRACK.

[_With a little hesitation, rising and resting his hands on the back of
his chair._] My dear Tesman—and you too, Mrs. Tesman—I think I ought not
to keep you in the dark about something that—that——

                                TESMAN.

That concerns Eilert——?

                                 BRACK.

Both you and him.

                                TESMAN.

Well, my dear Judge, out with it.

                                 BRACK.

You must be prepared to find your appointment deferred longer than you
desired or expected.

                                TESMAN.

[_Jumping up uneasily._] Is there some hitch about it? Eh?

                                 BRACK.

The nomination may perhaps be made conditional on the result of a
competition——

                                TESMAN.

Competition! Think of that, Hedda!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Leans further back in the chair._] Aha—aha!

                                TESMAN.

But who can my competitor be? Surely not——?

                                 BRACK.

Yes, precisely—Eilert Lövborg.

                                TESMAN.

[_Clasping his hands._] No, no—it’s quite inconceivable! Quite
impossible! Eh?

                                 BRACK.

H’m—that is what it may come to, all the same.

                                TESMAN.

Well but, Judge Brack—it would show the most incredible lack of
consideration for me. [_Gesticulates with his arms._] For—just think—I’m
a married man! We have married on the strength of these prospects, Hedda
and I; and run deep into debt; and borrowed money from Aunt Julia too.
Good heavens, they had as good as promised me the appointment. Eh?

                                 BRACK.

Well, well, well—no doubt you will get it in the end; only after a
contest.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Immovable in her arm-chair._] Fancy, Tesman, there will be a sort of
sporting interest in that.

                                TESMAN.

Why, my dearest Hedda, how can you be so indifferent about it?

                                 HEDDA.

[_As before._] I am not at all indifferent. I am most eager to see who
wins.

                                 BRACK.

In any case, Mrs. Tesman, it is best that you should know how matters
stand. I mean—before you set about the little purchases I hear you are
threatening.

                                 HEDDA.

This can make no difference.

                                 BRACK.

Indeed! Then I have no more to say. Good-bye! [_To TESMAN._] I shall
look in on my way back from my afternoon walk, and take you home with
me.

                                TESMAN.

Oh yes; yes—your news has quite upset me.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Reclining, holds out her hand._] Good-bye, Judge; and be sure you call
in the afternoon.

                                 BRACK.

Many thanks. Good-bye, good-bye!

                                TESMAN.

[_Accompanying him to the door._] Good-bye my dear Judge! You must
really excuse me——

                               [_JUDGE BRACK goes out by the hall door._

                                TESMAN.

[_Crosses the room._] Oh Hedda—one should never rush into adventures.
Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looks at him, smiling._] Do _you_ do _that_?

                                TESMAN.

Yes, dear—there is no denying—it was adventurous to go and marry and set
up house upon mere expectations.

                                 HEDDA.

Perhaps you are right there.

                                TESMAN.

Well—at all events, we have our delightful home, Hedda! Fancy, the home
we both dreamed of—the home we were in love with, I may almost say. Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Rising slowly and wearily._] It was part of our compact that we were
to go into society—to keep open house.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, if you only knew how I had been looking forward to it! Fancy—to see
you as hostess—in a select circle! Eh? Well, well, well—for the present
we shall have to get on without society, Hedda—only to invite Aunt Julia
now and then.—Oh, I intended you to lead such an utterly different life,
dear——!

                                 HEDDA.

Of course I cannot have my man in livery just yet.

                                TESMAN.

Oh no, unfortunately. It would be out of the question for us to keep a
footman, you know.

                                 HEDDA.

And the saddle-horse I was to have had——

                                TESMAN.

[_Aghast._] The saddle-horse!

                                 HEDDA.

——I suppose I must not think of that now.

                                TESMAN.

Good heavens, no!—that’s as clear as daylight.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Goes up the room._] Well, I shall have one thing at least to kill time
with in the meanwhile.

                                TESMAN.

[_Beaming._] Oh thank heaven for that! What is it, Hedda? Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

[_In the middle doorway, looks at him with covert scorn._] My pistols,
George.

                                TESMAN.

[_In alarm._] Your pistols!

                                 HEDDA.

[_With cold eyes._] General Gabler’s pistols.

          [_She goes out through the inner room, to the left._

                                TESMAN.

[_Rushes up to the middle doorway and calls after her_:] No, for
heaven’s sake, Hedda darling—don’t touch those dangerous things! For my
sake, Hedda! Eh?

-----

Footnote 11:

  Tesman, whose Christian name in the original is “Jörgen,” is described
  as “stipendiat i kulturhistorie”—that is to say, the holder of a
  scholarship for purposes of research into the History of Civilisation.

Footnote 12:

  In the original “Assessor.”

                               ACT SECOND

_The room at the_ TESMANS’ _as in the first Act, except that the piano
      has been removed, and an elegant little writing-table with
      book-shelves put in its place. A smaller table stands near the
      sofa on the left. Most of the bouquets have been taken away._ MRS.
      ELVSTED’S _bouquet is upon the large table in front.—It is
      afternoon._

HEDDA, _dressed to receive callers, is alone in the room. She stands by
      the open glass door, loading a revolver. The fellow to it lies in
      an open pistol-case on the writing-table._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looks down the garden, and calls_:] So you are here again, Judge!

                                 BRACK.

[_Is heard calling from a distance._] As you see, Mrs. Tesman!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Raises the pistol and points._] Now I’ll shoot you, Judge Brack!

                                 BRACK.

[_Calling unseen._] No, no, no! Don’t stand aiming at me!

                                 HEDDA.

This is what comes of sneaking in by the back way.[19]    [_She fires._

                                 BRACK.

[_Nearer._] Are you out of your senses——!

                                 HEDDA.

Dear me—did I happen to hit you?

                                 BRACK.

[_Still outside._] I wish you would let these pranks alone!

                                 HEDDA.

Come in then, Judge.

JUDGE BRACK, _dressed as though for a men’s party, enters by the glass
    door. He carries a light overcoat over his arm._

                                 BRACK.

What the deuce—haven’t you tired of that sport, yet? What are you
shooting at?

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, I am only firing in the air.

                                 BRACK.

[_Gently takes the pistol out of her hand._] Allow me, madam! [_Looks at
it._] Ah—I know this pistol well! [_Looks around._] Where is the case?
Ah, here it is. [_Lays the pistol in it, and shuts it._] Now we won’t
play at that game any more to-day.

                                 HEDDA.

Then what in heaven’s name would you have me do with myself?

                                 BRACK.

Have you had no visitors?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Closing the glass door._] Not one. I suppose all our set are still out
of town.

                                 BRACK.

And is Tesman not at home either?

                                 HEDDA.

[_At the writing-table, putting the pistol-case in a drawer which she
shuts._] No. He rushed off to his aunt’s directly after lunch; he didn’t
expect you so early.

                                 BRACK.

H’m—how stupid of me not to have thought of that!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Turning her head to look at him._] Why stupid?

                                 BRACK.

Because if I had thought of it I should have come a little—earlier.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Crossing the room._] Then you would have found no one to receive you;
for I have been in my room changing my dress ever since lunch.

                                 BRACK.

And is there no sort of little chink that we could hold a parley
through?

                                 HEDDA.

You have forgotten to arrange one.

                                 BRACK.

That was another piece of stupidity.

                                 HEDDA.

Well, we must just settle down here—and wait. Tesman is not likely to be
back for some time yet.

                                 BRACK.

Never mind; I shall not be impatient.

HEDDA _seats herself in the corner of the sofa._ BRACK _lays his
    overcoat over the back of the nearest chair, and sits down, but
    keeps his hat in his hand. A short silence. They look at each
    other._

                                 HEDDA.

Well?

                                 BRACK.

[_In the same tone._] Well?

                                 HEDDA.

I spoke first.

                                 BRACK.

[_Bending a little forward._] Come, let us have a cosy little chat, Mrs.
Hedda.[20]

                                 HEDDA.

[_Leaning further back in the sofa._] Does it not seem like a whole
eternity since our last talk? Of course I don’t count those few words
yesterday evening and this morning.

                                 BRACK.

You mean since our last confidential talk? Our last _tête-à-tête_?

                                 HEDDA.

Well yes—since you put it so.

                                 BRACK.

Not a day has passed but I have wished that you were home again.

                                 HEDDA.

And I have done nothing but wish the same thing.

                                 BRACK.

You? Really, Mrs. Hedda? And I thought you had been enjoying your tour
so much!

                                 HEDDA.

Oh yes, you may be sure of that!

                                 BRACK.

But Tesman’s letters spoke of nothing but happiness.

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, _Tesman_! You see, he thinks nothing so delightful as grubbing in
libraries and making copies of old parchments, or whatever you call
them.

                                 BRACK.

[_With a spice of malice._] Well, that is his vocation in life—or part
of it at any rate.

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, of course; and no doubt when it’s your vocation——. But _I_! Oh, my
dear Mr. Brack, how mortally bored I have been.

                                 BRACK.

[_Sympathetically._] Do you really say so? In downright earnest?

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, you can surely understand it——! To go for six whole months without
meeting a soul that knew anything of our circle, or could talk about the
things we are interested in.

                                 BRACK.

Yes, yes—I too should feel that a deprivation.

                                 HEDDA.

And then, what I found most intolerable of all——

                                 BRACK.

Well?

                                 HEDDA.

——was being everlastingly in the company of—one and the same person——

                                 BRACK.

[_With a nod of assent._] Morning, noon, and night, yes—at all possible
times and seasons.

                                 HEDDA.

I said “everlastingly.”

                                 BRACK.

Just so. But I should have thought, with our excellent Tesman, one
could——

                                 HEDDA.

Tesman is—a specialist, my dear Judge.

                                 BRACK.

Undeniably.

                                 HEDDA.

And specialists are not at all amusing to travel with. Not in the long
run at any rate.

                                 BRACK.

Not even—the specialist one happens to _love_?

                                 HEDDA.

Faugh—don’t use that sickening word!

                                 BRACK.

[_Taken aback._] What do you say, Mrs. Hedda?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Half laughing, half irritated._] You should just try it! To hear of
nothing but the history of civilisation, morning, noon, and night——

                                 BRACK.

Everlastingly.

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, yes, yes! And then all this about the domestic industry of the
middle ages——! That’s the most disgusting part of it!

                                 BRACK.

[_Looks searchingly at her._] But tell me—in that case, how am I to
understand your——? H’m——

                                 HEDDA.

My accepting George Tesman, you mean?

                                 BRACK.

Well, let us put it so.

                                 HEDDA.

Good heavens, do you see anything so wonderful in that?

                                 BRACK.

Yes and no—Mrs. Hedda.

                                 HEDDA.

I had positively danced myself tired, my dear Judge. My day was done——
[_With a slight shudder._] Oh no—I won’t say that; nor think it either!

                                 BRACK.

You have assuredly no reason to.

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, reasons—— [_Watching him closely._] And George Tesman—after all, you
must admit that he is correctness itself.

                                 BRACK.

His correctness and respectability are beyond all question.

                                 HEDDA.

And I don’t see anything absolutely ridiculous about him.—Do you?

                                 BRACK.

Ridiculous? N—no—I shouldn’t exactly say so——

                                 HEDDA.

Well—and his powers of research, at all events, are untiring.—I see no
reason why he should not one day come to the front, after all.

                                 BRACK.

[_Looks at her hesitatingly._] I thought that you, like every one else,
expected him to attain the highest distinction.

                                 HEDDA.

[_With an expression of fatigue._] Yes, so I did.—And then, since he was
bent, at all hazards, on being allowed to provide for me—I really don’t
know why I should not have accepted his offer?

                                 BRACK.

No—if you look at it in _that_ light——

                                 HEDDA.

It was more than my other adorers were prepared to do for me, my dear
Judge.

                                 BRACK.

[_Laughing._] Well, I can’t answer for all the rest; but as for myself,
you know quite well that I have always entertained a—a certain respect
for the marriage tie—for marriage as an institution, Mrs. Hedda.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Jestingly._] Oh, I assure you I have never cherished any hopes with
respect to you.

                                 BRACK.

All I require is a pleasant and intimate interior, where I can make
myself useful in every way, and am free to come and go as—as a trusted
friend——

                                 HEDDA.

Of the master of the house, do you mean?

                                 BRACK.

[_Bowing._] Frankly—of the mistress first of all; but of course of the
master too, in the second place. Such a triangular friendship—if I may
call it so—is really a great convenience for all parties, let me tell
you.

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, I have many a time longed for some one to make a third on our
travels. Oh—those railway-carriage _tête-à-têtes_——!

                                 BRACK.

Fortunately your wedding journey is over now.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Shaking her head._] Not by a long—long way. I have only arrived at a
station on the line.

                                 BRACK.

Well, then the passengers jump out and move about a little, Mrs. Hedda.

                                 HEDDA.

I never jump out.

                                 BRACK.

Really?

                                 HEDDA.

No—because there is always some one standing by to——

                                 BRACK.

[_Laughing._] To look at your ankles, do you mean?

                                 HEDDA.

Precisely.

                                 BRACK.

Well but, dear me——

                                 HEDDA.

[_With a gesture of repulsion._] I won’t have it. I would rather keep my
seat where I happen to be—and continue the _tête-à-tête_.

                                 BRACK.

But suppose a third person were to jump in and join the couple.

                                 HEDDA.

Ah—that is quite another matter.

                                 BRACK.

A trusted, sympathetic friend——

                                 HEDDA.

——with a fund of conversation on all sorts of lively topics——

                                 BRACK.

——and not the least bit of a specialist!

                                 HEDDA.

[_With an audible sigh._] Yes, that would be a relief indeed.

                                 BRACK.

[_Hears the front door open, and glances in that direction._] The
triangle is completed.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Half aloud._] And on goes the train.

GEORGE TESMAN, _in a grey walking-suit, with a soft felt hat, enters
    from the hall. He has a number of unbound books under his arm and in
    his pockets._

                                TESMAN.

[_Goes up to the table beside the corner settee._] Ouf—what a load for a
warm day—all these books. [_Lays them on the table._] I’m positively
perspiring, Hedda. Hallo—are you there already, my dear Judge? Eh? Berta
didn’t tell me.

                                 BRACK.

[_Rising._] I came in through the garden.

                                 HEDDA.

What books have you got there?

                                TESMAN.

[_Stands looking them through._] Some new books on my special
subjects—quite indispensable to me.

                                 HEDDA.

Your special subjects?

                                 BRACK.

Yes, books on his special subjects, Mrs. Tesman.

          [_BRACK and HEDDA exchange a confidential smile._

                                 HEDDA.

Do you need still more books on your special subjects?

                                TESMAN.

Yes, my dear Hedda, one can never have too many of them. Of course one
must keep up with all that is written and published.

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, I suppose one must.

                                TESMAN.

[_Searching among his books._] And look here—I have got hold of Eilert
Lövborg’s new book too. [_Offering it to her._] Perhaps you would like
to glance through it, Hedda? Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

No, thank you. Or rather—afterwards perhaps.

                                TESMAN.

I looked into it a little on the way home.

                                 BRACK.

Well, what do you think of it—as a specialist?

                                TESMAN.

I think it shows quite remarkable soundness of judgment. He never wrote
like that before. [_Putting the books together._] Now I shall take all
these into my study. I’m longing to cut the leaves——! And then I must
change my clothes. [_To BRACK._] I suppose we needn’t start just yet?
Eh?

                                 BRACK.

Oh, dear no—there is not the slightest hurry.

                                TESMAN.

Well then, I will take my time. [_Is going with his books, but stops in
the doorway and turns._] By-the-bye, Hedda—Aunt Julia is not coming this
evening.

                                 HEDDA.

Not coming? Is it that affair of the bonnet that keeps her away?

                                TESMAN.

Oh, not at all. How could you think such a thing of Aunt Julia? Just
fancy——! The fact is, Aunt Rina is very ill.

                                 HEDDA.

She always is.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, but to-day she is much worse than usual, poor dear.

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, then it’s only natural that her sister should remain with her. I
must bear my disappointment.

                                TESMAN.

And you can’t imagine, dear, how delighted Aunt Julia seemed to
be—because you had come home looking so flourishing!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Half aloud, rising._] Oh, those everlasting Aunts!

                                TESMAN.

What?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Going to the glass door._] Nothing.

                                TESMAN.

Oh, all right.

          [_He goes through the inner room, out to the right._

                                 BRACK.

What bonnet were you talking about?

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, it was a little episode with Miss Tesman this morning. She had laid
down her bonnet on the chair there—[_Looks at him and smiles._]—and I
pretended to think it was the servant’s.

                                 BRACK.

[_Shaking his head._] Now my dear Mrs. Hedda, how could you do such a
thing? To that excellent old lady, too!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Nervously crossing the room._] Well, you see—these impulses come over
me all of a sudden; and I _cannot_ resist them. [_Throws herself down in
the easy-chair by the stove._] Oh, I don’t know how to explain it.

                                 BRACK.

[_Behind the easy-chair._] You are not really happy—that is at the
bottom of it.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looking straight before her._] I know of no reason why I should
be—happy. Perhaps you can give me one?

                                 BRACK.

Well—amongst other things, because you have got exactly the home you had
set your heart on.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looks up at him and laughs._] Do you too believe in that legend?

                                 BRACK.

Is there nothing in it, then?

                                 HEDDA.

Oh yes, there is _something_ in it.

                                 BRACK.

Well?

                                 HEDDA.

There is _this_ in it, that I made use of Tesman to see me home from
evening parties last summer——

                                 BRACK.

I, unfortunately, had to go quite a different way.

                                 HEDDA.

That’s true. I know you were going a different way last summer.

                                 BRACK.

[_Laughing._] Oh fie, Mrs. Hedda! Well, then—you and Tesman——?

                                 HEDDA.

Well, we happened to pass here one evening; Tesman, poor fellow, was
writhing in the agony of having to find conversation; so I took pity on
the learned man——

                                 BRACK.

[_Smiles doubtfully._] _You_ took pity? H’m——

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, I really did. And so—to help him out of his torment—I happened to
say, in pure thoughtlessness, that I should like to live in this villa.

                                 BRACK.

No more than that?

                                 HEDDA.

Not _that_ evening.

                                 BRACK.

But afterwards?

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, my thoughtlessness had consequences, my dear Judge.

                                 BRACK.

Unfortunately that too often happens, Mrs. Hedda.

                                 HEDDA.

Thanks! So you see it was this enthusiasm for Secretary Falk’s villa
that first constituted a bond of sympathy between George Tesman and me.
From _that_ came our engagement and our marriage, and our wedding
journey, and all the rest of it. Well, well, my dear Judge—as you make
your bed so you must lie, I could almost say.

                                 BRACK.

This is exquisite! And you really cared not a rap about it all the time?

                                 HEDDA.

No, heaven knows I didn’t.

                                 BRACK.

But now? Now that we have made it so homelike for you?

                                 HEDDA.

Uh—the rooms all seem to smell of lavender and dried rose-leaves.—But
perhaps it’s Aunt Julia that has brought that scent with her.

                                 BRACK.

[_Laughing._] No, I think it must be a legacy from the late Mrs.
Secretary Falk.

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, there is an odour of mortality about it. It reminds me of a
bouquet—the day after the ball. [_Clasps her hands behind her head,
leans back in her chair and looks at him._] Oh, my dear Judge—you cannot
imagine how horribly I shall bore myself here.

                                 BRACK.

Why should not you, too, find some sort of vocation in life, Mrs. Hedda?

                                 HEDDA.

A vocation—that should attract me?

                                 BRACK.

If possible, of course.

                                 HEDDA.

Heaven knows what sort of a vocation that could be. I often wonder
whether——[_Breaking off._] But that would never do either.

                                 BRACK.

Who can tell? Let me hear what it is.

                                 HEDDA.

Whether I might not get Tesman to go into politics, I mean.

                                 BRACK.

[_Laughing._] Tesman? No really now, political life is not the thing for
him—not at all in his line.

                                 HEDDA.

No, I daresay not.—But if I could get him into it all the same?

                                 BRACK.

Why—what satisfaction could you find in that? If he is not fitted for
that sort of thing, why should you want to drive him into it?

                                 HEDDA.

Because I am bored, I tell you! [_After a pause._] So you think it quite
out of the question that Tesman should ever get into the ministry?

                                 BRACK.

H’m—you see, my dear Mrs. Hedda—to get into the ministry, he would have
to be a tolerably rich man.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Rising impatiently._] Yes, there we have it! It is this genteel
poverty I have managed to drop into——! [_Crosses the room._] That is
what makes life so pitiable! So utterly ludicrous!—For that’s what it
is.

                                 BRACK.

Now _I_ should say the fault lay elsewhere.

                                 HEDDA.

Where, then?

                                 BRACK.

You have never gone through any really stimulating experience.

                                 HEDDA.

Anything serious, you mean?

                                 BRACK.

Yes, you may call it so. But now you may perhaps have one in store.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Tossing her head._] Oh, you’re thinking of the annoyances about this
wretched professorship! But that must be Tesman’s own affair. I assure
you I shall not waste a thought upon it.

                                 BRACK.

No, no, I daresay not. But suppose now that what people call—in elegant
language—a solemn responsibility were to come upon you? [_Smiling._] A
new responsibility, Mrs. Hedda?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Angrily._] Be quiet! Nothing of that sort will ever happen!

                                 BRACK.

[_Warily._] We will speak of this again a year hence—at the very
outside.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Curtly._] I have no turn for anything of the sort, Judge Brack. No
responsibilities for me!

                                 BRACK.

Are you so unlike the generality of women as to have no turn for duties
which——?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Beside the glass door._] Oh, be quiet, I tell you!—I often think there
is only one thing in the world I have any turn for.

                                 BRACK.

[_Drawing near to her._] And what is that, if I may ask?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Stands looking out._] Boring myself to death. Now you know it.
[_Turns, looks towards the inner room, and laughs._] Yes, as I thought!
Here comes the Professor.

                                 BRACK.

[_Softly, in a tone of warning._] Come, come, come, Mrs. Hedda!

GEORGE TESMAN, _dressed for the party, with his gloves and hat in his
    hand, enters from the right through the inner room._

                                TESMAN.

Hedda, has no message come from Eilert Lövborg? Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

No.

                                TESMAN.

Then you’ll see he’ll be here presently.

                                 BRACK.

Do you really think he will come?

                                TESMAN.

Yes, I am almost sure of it. For what you were telling us this morning
must have been a mere floating rumour.

                                 BRACK.

You think so?

                                TESMAN.

At any rate, Aunt Julia said she did not believe for a moment that he
would ever stand in my way again. Fancy that!

                                 BRACK.

Well then, that’s all right.

                                TESMAN.

[_Placing his hat and gloves on a chair on the right._] Yes, but you
must really let me wait for him as long as possible.

                                 BRACK.

We have plenty of time yet. None of my guests will arrive before seven
or half-past.

                                TESMAN.

Then meanwhile we can keep Hedda company, and see what happens. Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Placing BRACK’S hat and overcoat upon the corner settee._] And at the
worst Mr. Lövborg can remain here with me.

                                 BRACK.

[_Offering to take his things._] Oh, allow me, Mrs. Tesman!—What do you
mean by ”At the worst“?

                                 HEDDA.

If he won’t go with you and Tesman.

                                TESMAN.

[_Looks dubiously at her._] But, Hedda dear—do you think it would quite
do for him to remain with you? Eh? Remember, Aunt Julia can’t come.

                                 HEDDA.

No, but Mrs. Elvsted is coming. We three can have a cup of tea together.

                                TESMAN.

Oh yes, _that_ will be all right.

                                 BRACK.

[_Smiling._] And that would perhaps be the safest plan for him.

                                 HEDDA.

Why so?

                                 BRACK.

Well, you know, Mrs. Tesman, how you used to gird at my little bachelor
parties. You declared they were adapted only for men of the strictest
principles.

                                 HEDDA.

But no doubt Mr. Lövborg’s principles are strict enough now. A converted
sinner——

                                      [_BERTA appears at the hall door._

                                 BERTA.

There’s a gentleman asking if you are at home, ma’am——

                                 HEDDA.

Well, show him in.

                                TESMAN.

[_Softly._] I’m sure it is he! Fancy that!

EILERT LÖVBORG _enters from the hall. He is slim and lean; of the same
    age as_ TESMAN, _but looks older and somewhat worn-out. His hair and
    beard are of a blackish brown, his face long and pale, but with
    patches of colour on the cheekbones. He is dressed in a well-cut
    black visiting suit, quite new. He has dark gloves and a silk hat.
    He stops near the door, and makes a rapid bow, seeming somewhat
    embarrassed._

                                TESMAN.

[_Goes up to him and shakes him warmly by the hand._] Well, my dear
Eilert—so at last we meet again!

                            EILERT LÖVBORG.

[_Speaks in a subdued voice._] Thanks for your letter, Tesman.
[_Approaching HEDDA._] Will you too shake hands with me, Mrs. Tesman?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Taking his hand._] I am glad to see you, Mr. Lövborg. [_With a motion
of her hand._] I don’t know whether you two gentlemen——?

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Bowing slightly._] Judge Brack, I think.

                                 BRACK.

[_Doing likewise._] Oh yes,—in the old days——

                                TESMAN.

[_To Lövborg, with his hands on his shoulders._] And now you must make
yourself entirely at home, Eilert! Musn’t he, Hedda?—For I hear you are
going to settle in town again? Eh?

                                LÖVBORG.

Yes, I am.

                                TESMAN.

Quite right, quite right. Let me tell you, I have got hold of your new
book; but I haven’t had time to read it yet.

                                LÖVBORG.

You may spare yourself the trouble.

                                TESMAN.

Why so?

                                LÖVBORG.

Because there is very little in it.

                                TESMAN.

Just fancy—how can you say so?

                                 BRACK.

But it has been very much praised, I hear.

                                LÖVBORG.

That was what I wanted; so I put nothing into the book but what every
one would agree with.

                                 BRACK.

Very wise of you.

                                TESMAN.

Well but, my dear Eilert——!

                                LÖVBORG.

For now I mean to win myself a position again—to make a fresh start.

                                TESMAN.

[_A little embarrassed._] Ah, that is what you wish to do? Eh?

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Smiling, lays down his hat, and draws a packet, wrapped in paper, from
his coat pocket._] But when this one appears, George Tesman, you will
have to read it. For _this_ is the real book—the book I have put my true
self into.

                                TESMAN.

Indeed? And what is it?

                                LÖVBORG.

It is the continuation.

                                TESMAN.

The continuation? Of what?

                                LÖVBORG.

Of the book.

                                TESMAN.

Of the new book?

                                LÖVBORG.

Of course.

                                TESMAN.

Why, my dear Eilert—does it not come down to our own days?

                                LÖVBORG.

Yes, it does; and this one deals with the future.

                                TESMAN.

With the future! But, good heavens, we know nothing of the future!

                                LÖVBORG.

No; but there is a thing or two to be said about it all the same.
[_Opens the packet._] Look here——

                                TESMAN.

Why, that’s not your handwriting.

                                LÖVBORG.

I dictated it. [_Turning over the pages._] It falls into two sections.
The first deals with the civilising forces of the future. And here is
the second—[_running through the pages towards the end_]—forecasting the
probable line of development.

                                TESMAN.

How odd now! I should never have thought of writing anything of that
sort.

                                 HEDDA.

[_At the glass door, drumming on the pane._] H’m——. I daresay not.

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Replacing the manuscript in its paper and laying the packet on the
table._] I brought it, thinking I might read you a little of it this
evening.

                                TESMAN.

That was very good of you, Eilert. But this evening——? [_Looking at
BRACK._] I don’t quite see how we can manage it——

                                LÖVBORG.

Well then, some other time. There is no hurry.

                                 BRACK.

I must tell you, Mr. Lövborg—there is a little gathering at my house
this evening—mainly in honour of Tesman, you know——

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Looking for his hat._] Oh—then I won’t detain you——

                                 BRACK.

No, but listen—will you not do me the favour of joining us?

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Curtly and decidedly._] No, I can’t—thank you very much.

                                 BRACK.

Oh, nonsense—do! We shall be quite a select little circle. And I assure
you we shall have a “lively time,” as Mrs. Hed—as Mrs. Tesman says.

                                LÖVBORG.

I have no doubt of it. But nevertheless——

                                 BRACK.

And then you might bring your manuscript with you, and read it to Tesman
at my house. I could give you a room to yourselves.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, think of that, Eilert,—why shouldn’t you? Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Interposing._] But, Tesman, if Mr. Lövborg would really rather not! I
am sure Mr. Lövborg is much more inclined to remain here and have supper
with me.

Lövborg.

[_Looking at her._] With you, Mrs. Tesman?

                                 HEDDA.

And with Mrs. Elvsted.

                                LÖVBORG.

Ah——[_Lightly._] I saw her for a moment this morning.

                                 HEDDA.

Did you? Well, she is coming this evening. So you see you are almost
bound to remain, Mr. Lövborg, or she will have no one to see her home.

                                LÖVBORG.

That’s true. Many thanks, Mrs. Tesman—in that case I will remain.

                                 HEDDA.

Then I have one or two orders to give the servant——

          [_She goes to the hall door and rings._ BERTA _enters._ HEDDA
            _talks to her in a whisper, and points towards the inner
            room._ BERTA _nods and goes out again._

                                TESMAN.

[_At the same time, to LÖVBORG._] Tell me, Eilert—is it this new
subject—the future—that you are going to lecture about?

                                LÖVBORG.

Yes.

                                TESMAN.

They told me at the bookseller’s that you are going to deliver a course
of lectures this autumn.

                                LÖVBORG.

That is my intention. I hope you won’t take it ill, Tesman.

                                TESMAN.

Oh no, not in the least! But——?

                                LÖVBORG.

I can quite understand that it must be disagreeable to you.

                                TESMAN.

[_Cast down._] Oh, I can’t expect you, out of consideration for me, to——

                                LÖVBORG.

But I shall wait till you have received your appointment.

                                TESMAN.

Will you wait? Yes but—yes but—are you not going to compete with me? Eh?

                                LÖVBORG.

No; it is only the moral victory I care for.

                                TESMAN.

Why, bless me—then Aunt Julia was right after all! Oh yes—I knew it!
Hedda! Just fancy—Eilert Lövborg is not going to stand in our way!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Curtly._] _Our_ way? Pray leave _me_ out of the question.

          [_She goes up towards the inner room, where_ BERTA _is placing
            a tray with decanters and glasses on the table._ HEDDA _nods
            approval, and comes forward again._ BERTA _goes out._

                                TESMAN.

[_At the same time._] And you, Judge Brack—what do you say to this? Eh?

                                 BRACK.

Well, I say that a moral victory—h’m—may be all very fine——

                                TESMAN.

Yes, certainly. But all the same——

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looking at TESMAN with a cold smile._] You stand there looking as if
you were thunderstruck——

                                TESMAN.

Yes—so I am—I almost think——

                                 BRACK.

Don’t you see, Mrs. Tesman, a thunderstorm has just passed over?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Pointing towards the inner room._] Will you not take a glass of cold
punch, gentlemen?

                                 BRACK.

[_Looking at his watch._] A stirrup-cup? Yes, it wouldn’t come amiss.

                                TESMAN.

A capital idea, Hedda! Just the thing! Now that the weight has been
taken off my mind——

                                 HEDDA.

Will you not join them, Mr. Lövborg?

                                LÖVBORG.

_[With a gesture of refusal._] No, thank you. Nothing for me.

                                 BRACK.

Why bless me—cold punch is surely not poison.

                                LÖVBORG.

Perhaps not for every one.

                                 HEDDA.

I will keep Mr. Lövborg company in the meantime.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, yes, Hedda dear, do.

          [_He and_ BRACK _go into the inner room, seat themselves,
            drink punch, smoke cigarettes, and carry on a lively
            conversation during what follows._ EILERT LÖVBORG _remains
            standing beside the stove. HEDDA goes to the writing-table._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Raising her voice a little!_] Do you care to look at some photographs,
Mr. Lövborg? You know Tesman and I made a tour in the Tyrol on our way
home?

          [_She takes up an album, and places it on the table beside the
            sofa, in the further corner of which she seats herself._
            EILERT LÖVBORG _approaches, stops, and looks at her. Then he
            takes a chair and seats himself to her left, with his back
            towards the inner room._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Opening the album._] Do you see this range of mountains, Mr. Lövborg?
It’s the Ortler group. Tesman has written the name underneath. Here it
is: “The Ortler group near Meran.”

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Who has never taken his eyes off her, says softly and slowly_:]
Hedda—Gabler!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Glancing hastily at him._] Ah! Hush!

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Repeats softly._] Hedda Gabler!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looking at the album._] That was my name in the old days—when we two
knew each other.

                                LÖVBORG.

And I must teach myself never to say Hedda Gabler again—never, as long
as I live.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Still turning over the pages._] Yes, you must. And I think you ought
to practise in time. The sooner the better, I should say.

                                LÖVBORG.

[_In a tone of indignation._] Hedda Gabler married? And married
to—George Tesman!

                                 HEDDA.

Yes—so the world goes.

                                LÖVBORG.

Oh, Hedda, Hedda—how could you[21] throw yourself away!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looks sharply at him._] What? I can’t allow this!

                                LÖVBORG.

What do you mean?

          [TESMAN _comes into the room and goes towards the sofa._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Hears him coming and says in an indifferent tone._] And this is a view
from the Val d’Ampezzo, Mr. Lövborg. Just look at these peaks! [_Looks
affectionately up at TESMAN._] What’s the name of these curious peaks,
dear?

                                TESMAN.

Let me see. Oh, those are the Dolomites.

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, that’s it!—Those are the Dolomites, Mr. Lövborg.

                                TESMAN.

Hedda dear,—I only wanted to ask whether I shouldn’t bring you a little
punch after all? For yourself at any rate—eh?

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, do, please; and perhaps a few biscuits.

                                TESMAN.

No cigarettes?

                                 HEDDA.

No.

                                TESMAN.

Very well.

          [_He goes into the inner room and out to the right._ BRACK
            _sits in the inner room, and keeps an eye from time to time
            on_ HEDDA _and_ LÖVBORG.

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Softly, as before._] Answer me, Hedda—how could you go and do this?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Apparently absorbed in the album._] If you continue to say _du_ to me
I won’t talk to you.

                                LÖVBORG.

May I not say _du_ even when we are alone?

                                 HEDDA.

No. You may think it; but you mustn’t say it.

                                LÖVBORG.

Ah, I understand. It is an offence against George Tesman, whom
you[22]—love.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Glances at him and smiles._] Love? What an idea!

                                LÖVBORG.

You don’t love him then!

                                 HEDDA.

But I won’t hear of any sort of unfaithfulness! Remember that.

                                LÖVBORG.

Hedda—answer me one thing——

                                 HEDDA.

Hush!

          [TESMAN _enters with a small tray from the inner room._

                                TESMAN.

Here you are! Isn’t this tempting?

                                       [_He puts the tray on the table._

                                 HEDDA.

Why do you bring it yourself?

                                TESMAN.

[_Filling the glasses._] Because I think it’s such fun to wait upon you,
Hedda.

                                 HEDDA.

But you have poured out two glasses. Mr. Lövborg said he wouldn’t have
any——

                                TESMAN.

No, but Mrs. Elvsted will soon be here, won’t she?

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, by-the-bye—Mrs. Elvsted——

                                TESMAN.

Had you forgotten her? Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

We were so absorbed in these photographs. [_Shows him a picture._] Do
you remember this little village?

                                TESMAN.

Oh, it’s that one just below the Brenner Pass. It was there we passed
the night——

                                 HEDDA.

——and met that lively party of tourists.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, that was the place. Fancy—if we could only have had _you_ with us,
Eilert! Eh?

                  [_He returns to the inner room and sits beside_ BRACK.

                                LÖVBORG.

Answer me this one thing, Hedda——

                                 HEDDA.

Well?

                                LÖVBORG.

Was there no love in your friendship for _me_ either? Not a spark—not a
tinge of love in it?

                                 HEDDA.

I wonder if there was? To me it seems as though we were two good
comrades—two thoroughly intimate friends. [_Smilingly._] You especially
were frankness itself.

                                LÖVBORG.

It was you that made me so.

                                 HEDDA.

As I look back upon it all, I think there was really something
beautiful, something fascinating—something daring—in—in that secret
intimacy—that comradeship which no living creature so much as dreamed
of.

                                LÖVBORG.

Yes, yes, Hedda! Was there not?—When I used to come to your father’s in
the afternoon—and the General sat over at the window reading his
papers—with his back towards us——

                                 HEDDA.

And we two on the corner sofa——

                                LÖVBORG.

Always with the same illustrated paper before us——

                                 HEDDA.

For want of an album, yes.

                                LÖVBORG.

Yes, Hedda, and when I made my confessions to you—told you about myself,
things that at that time no one else knew! There I would sit and tell
you of my escapades—my days and nights of devilment. Oh, Hedda—what was
the power in you that forced me to confess these things?

                                 HEDDA.

Do you think it was any power in me?

                                LÖVBORG.

How else can I explain it? And all those—those roundabout questions you
used to put to me——

                                 HEDDA.

Which you understood so particularly well——

                                LÖVBORG.

How could you sit and question me like that? Question me quite frankly——

                                 HEDDA.

In roundabout terms, please observe.

                                LÖVBORG.

Yes, but frankly nevertheless. Cross-question me about—all that sort of
thing?

                                 HEDDA.

And how could you answer, Mr. Lövborg?

                                LÖVBORG.

Yes, that is just what I can’t understand—in looking back upon it. But
tell me now, Hedda—was there not love at the bottom of our friendship?
On your side, did you not feel as though you might purge my stains
away—if I made you my confessor? Was it not so?

                                 HEDDA.

No, not quite.

                                LÖVBORG.

What was your motive, then?

                                 HEDDA.

Do you think it quite incomprehensible that a young girl—when it can be
done—without any one knowing——

                                LÖVBORG.

Well?

                                 HEDDA.

——should be glad to have a peep, now and then, into a world which——

                                LÖVBORG.

Which——?

                                 HEDDA.

——which she is forbidden to know anything about?

                                LÖVBORG.

So _that_ was it?

                                 HEDDA.

Partly. Partly—I almost think.

                                LÖVBORG.

Comradeship in the thirst for life. But why should not _that_, at any
rate, have continued?

                                 HEDDA.

The fault was yours.

                                LÖVBORG.

It was you that broke with me.

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, when our friendship threatened to develop into something more
serious. Shame upon you, Eilert Lövborg! How could you think of wronging
your—your frank comrade?

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Clenching his hands._] Oh, why did you not carry out your threat? Why
did you not shoot me down?

                                 HEDDA.

Because I have such a dread of scandal.

                                LÖVBORG.

Yes, Hedda, you are a coward at heart.

                                 HEDDA.

A terrible coward. [_Changing her tone._] But it was a lucky thing for
you. And now you have found ample consolation at the Elvsteds’.

                                LÖVBORG.

I know what Thea has confided to you.

                                 HEDDA.

And perhaps you have confided to her something about us?

                                LÖVBORG.

Not a word. She is too stupid to understand anything of that sort.

                                 HEDDA.

Stupid?

                                LÖVBORG.

She is stupid about matters of that sort.

                                 HEDDA.

And I am cowardly. [_Bends over towards him, without looking him in the
face, and says more softly_:] But now I will confide something to _you_.

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Eagerly._] Well?

                                 HEDDA.

The fact that I dared not shoot you down——

                                LÖVBORG.

Yes!

                                 HEDDA.

——_that_ was not my most arrant cowardice—that evening.

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Looks at her a moment, understands, and whispers passionately._] Oh,
Hedda! Hedda Gabler! Now I begin to see a hidden reason beneath our
comradeship! You[23] and I——! After all, then, it was your craving for
life——

                                 HEDDA.

[_Softly, with a sharp glance._] Take care! Believe nothing of the sort!

          [_Twilight has begun to fall. The hall door is opened from
            without by_ BERTA.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Closes the album with a bang and calls smilingly_:] Ah, at last! My
darling Thea,—come along!

MRS. ELVSTED _enters from the hall. She is in evening dress. The door is
    closed behind her._

                                 HEDDA.

[_On the sofa, stretches out her arms towards her._] My sweet Thea—you
can’t think how I have been longing for you!

          [MRS. ELVSTED, _in passing, exchanges slight salutations with
            the gentlemen in the inner room, then goes up to the table
            and gives_ HEDDA _her hand._ EILERT LÖVBORG _has risen. He
            and_ MRS. ELVSTED _greet each other with a silent nod._

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Ought I to go in and talk to your husband for a moment?

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, not at all. Leave those two alone. They will soon be going.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Are they going out?

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, to a supper-party.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Quickly, to LÖVBORG._] Not _you_?

                                LÖVBORG.

No.

                                 HEDDA.

Mr. Lövborg remains with us.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Takes a chair and is about to seat herself at his side._] Oh, how nice
it is here!

                                 HEDDA.

No, thank you, my little Thea! Not _there_! You’ll be good enough to
come over here to me. I will sit between you.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, just as you please.

          [_She goes round the table and seats herself on the sofa on_
            HEDDA’S _right._ LÖVBORG _re-seats himself on his chair._

                                LÖVBORG.

[_After a short pause, to HEDDA._] Is not she lovely to look at?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Lightly stroking her hair._] Only to look at?

                                LÖVBORG.

Yes. For _we_ two—she and I—_we_ are two real comrades. _We_ have
absolute faith in each other; so we can sit and talk with perfect
frankness——

                                 HEDDA.

Not round about, Mr. Lövborg?

                                LÖVBORG.

Well——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Softly clinging close to HEDDA._] Oh, how happy I am, Hedda! For, only
think, he says I have inspired him too.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looks at her with a smile._] Ah! Does he say that, dear?

                                LÖVBORG.

And then she is so brave, Mrs. Tesman!

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Good heavens—am I brave?

                                LÖVBORG.

Exceedingly—where your comrade is concerned.

                                 HEDDA.

Ah yes—courage! If one only had _that_!

                                LÖVBORG.

What then? What do you mean?

                                 HEDDA.

Then life would perhaps be liveable, after all. [_With a sudden change
of tone._] But now, my dearest Thea, you really must have a glass of
cold punch.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

No, thanks—I never take anything of that kind.

                                 HEDDA.

Well then, _you_, Mr. Lövborg.

                                LÖVBORG.

Nor I, thank you.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

No, he doesn’t either.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looks fixedly at him._] But if I say you _shall_?

                                LÖVBORG.

It would be no use.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Laughing._] Then I, poor creature, have no sort of power over you?

                                LÖVBORG.

Not in _that_ respect.

                                 HEDDA.

But seriously, I think you ought to—for your own sake.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Why, Hedda——!

                                LÖVBORG.

How so?

                                 HEDDA.

Or rather on account of other people.

                                LÖVBORG.

Indeed?

                                 HEDDA.

Otherwise people might be apt to suspect that—in your heart of
hearts—you did not feel quite secure—quite confident in yourself.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Softly._] Oh please, Hedda——

                                LÖVBORG.

People may suspect what they like—for the present.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Joyfully._] Yes, let them!

                                 HEDDA.

I saw it plainly in Judge Brack’s face a moment ago.

                                LÖVBORG.

What did you see?

                                 HEDDA.

His contemptuous smile, when you dared not go with them into the inner
room.

                                LÖVBORG.

Dared not? Of course I preferred to stop here and talk to _you_.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

What could be more natural, Hedda?

                                 HEDDA.

But the Judge could not guess that. And I saw, too, the way he smiled
and glanced at Tesman when you dared not accept his invitation to this
wretched little supper-party of his.

                                LÖVBORG.

Dared not! Do you say I dared not?

                                 HEDDA.

_I_ don’t say so. But that was how Judge Brack understood it.

                                LÖVBORG.

Well, let him.

                                 HEDDA.

Then you are not going with them?

                                LÖVBORG.

I will stay here with you and Thea.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, Hedda—how can you doubt that?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Smiles and nods approvingly to LÖVBORG._] Firm as a rock! Faithful to
your principles, now and for ever! Ah, that is how a man should be!
[_Turns to MRS. ELVSTED and caresses her._] Well now, what did I tell
you, when you came to us this morning in such a state of distraction——

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Surprised._] Distraction!

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Terrified._] Hedda—oh Hedda——!

                                 HEDDA.

You can see for yourself! You haven’t the slightest reason to be in such
mortal terror—— [_Interrupting herself._] There! Now we can all three
enjoy ourselves!

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Who has given a start._] Ah—what is all this, Mrs. Tesman?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh my God, Hedda! What are you saying? What are you doing?

                                 HEDDA.

Don’t get excited! That horrid Judge Brack is sitting watching you.

                                LÖVBORG.

So she was in mortal terror! On my account!

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Softly and piteously._] Oh, Hedda—now you have ruined everything!

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Looks fixedly at her for a moment. His face is distorted._] So _that_
was my comrade’s frank confidence in me?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Imploringly._] Oh, my dearest friend—only let me tell you——

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Takes one of the glasses of punch, raises it to his lips, and says in
a low, husky voice._] Your health, Thea!

                  [_He empties the glass, puts it down, and takes the
                    second._

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Softly._] Oh, Hedda, Hedda—how _could_ you do this?

                                 HEDDA.

_I_ do it? _I?_ Are you crazy?

                                LÖVBORG.

Here’s to your health too, Mrs. Tesman. Thanks for the truth. Hurrah for
the truth!

                  [_He empties the glass and is about to re-fill it._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Lays her hand on his arm._] Come, come—no more for the present.
Remember you are going out to supper.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

No, no, no!

                                 HEDDA.

Hush! They are sitting watching you.

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Putting down the glass._] Now, Thea—tell me the truth——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes.

                                LÖVBORG.

Did your husband know that you had come after me?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Wringing her hands._] Oh, Hedda—do you hear what he is asking?

                                LÖVBORG.

Was it arranged between you and him that you were to come to town and
look after me? Perhaps it was the Sheriff himself that urged you to
come? Aha, my dear—no doubt he wanted my help in his office! Or was it
at the card-table that he missed me?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Softly, in agony._] Oh, Lövborg, Lövborg——!

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Seizes a glass and is on the point of filling it._] Here’s a glass for
the old Sheriff too!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Preventing him._] No more just now. Remember, you have to read your
manuscript to Tesman.

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Calmly, putting down the glass._] It was stupid of me all this,
Thea—to take it in this way, I mean. Don’t be angry with me, my dear,
dear comrade. You shall see—both you and the others—that if I was fallen
once—now I have risen again! Thanks to _you_, Thea.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Radiant with joy._] Oh, heaven be praised——!

          [BRACK _has in the meantime looked at his watch. He and_
            TESMAN _rise and come into the drawing-room._

                                 BRACK.

[_Takes his hat and overcoat._] Well, Mrs. Tesman, our time has come.

                                 HEDDA.

I suppose it has.

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Rising._] Mine too, Judge Brack.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Softly and imploringly._] Oh, Lövborg, don’t do it!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Pinching her arm._] They can hear you!

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_With a suppressed shriek._] Ow!

                                LÖVBORG.

[_To BRACK._] You were good enough to invite me.

                                 BRACK.

Well, are you coming after all?

                                LÖVBORG.

Yes, many thanks.

                                 BRACK.

I’m delighted——

                                LÖVBORG.

[_To TESMAN, putting the parcel of MS. in his pocket._] I should like to
show you one or two things before I send it to the printers.

                                TESMAN.

Fancy—that will be delightful. But, Hedda dear, how is Mrs. Elvsted to
get home? Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, that can be managed somehow.

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Looking towards the ladies._] Mrs. Elvsted? Of course, I’ll come again
and fetch her. [_Approaching._] At ten or thereabouts, Mrs. Tesman? Will
that do?

                                 HEDDA.

Certainly. That will do capitally.

                                TESMAN.

Well, then, that’s all right. But you must not expect _me_ so early,
Hedda.

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, you may stop as long—as long as ever you please.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Trying to conceal her anxiety._] Well then, Mr. Lövborg—I shall remain
here until you come.

                                LÖVBORG.

[_With his hat in his hand._] Pray do, Mrs. Elvsted.

                                 BRACK.

And now off goes the excursion train, gentlemen! I hope we shall have a
lively time, as a certain fair lady puts it.

                                 HEDDA.

Ah, if only the fair lady could be present unseen——!

                                 BRACK.

Why unseen?

                                 HEDDA.

In order to hear a little of your liveliness at first hand, Judge Brack.

                                 BRACK.

[_Laughing._] I should not advise the fair lady to try it.

                                TESMAN.

[_Also laughing._] Come, you’re a nice one Hedda! Fancy that!

                                 BRACK.

Well, good-bye, good-bye, ladies.

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Bowing._] About ten o’clock, then.

          [BRACK, LÖVBORG, _and_ TESMAN _go out by the hall door. At the
            same time,_ BERTA _enters from the inner room with a lighted
            lamp, which she places on the drawing-room table; she goes
            out by the way she came._

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Who has risen and is wandering restlessly about the room._]
Hedda—Hedda—what will come of all this?

                                 HEDDA.

At ten o’clock—he will be here. I can see him already—with vine-leaves
in his hair—flushed and fearless——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, I hope he may.

                                 HEDDA.

And then, you see—then he will have regained control over himself. Then
he will be a free man for all his days.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh God!—if he would only come as you see him now!

                                 HEDDA.

He will come as I see him—so, and not otherwise! [_Rises and approaches
THEA._] You may doubt him as long as you please; _I_ believe in him. And
now we will try——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

You have some hidden motive in this, Hedda!

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, I _have_. I want for once in my life to have power to mould a human
destiny.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Have you not the power?

                                 HEDDA.

I have not—and have never had it.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Not your husband’s?

                                 HEDDA.

Do you think _that_ is worth the trouble? Oh, if you could only
understand how poor I am. And fate has made _you_ so rich! [_Clasps her
passionately in her arms._] I think I must burn your hair off, after
all.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Let me go! Let me go! I am afraid of you, Hedda!

                                 BERTA.

[_In the middle doorway._] Tea is laid in the dining-room, ma’am.

                                 HEDDA.

Very well. We are coming.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

No, no, no! I would rather go home alone! At once!

                                 HEDDA.

Nonsense! First you shall have a cup of tea, you little stupid. And
then—at ten o’clock—Eilert Lövborg will be here—with vine-leaves in his
hair.

          [_She drags_ MRS. ELVSTED _almost by force towards the middle
            doorway._




                               ACT THIRD.

_The room at the_ TESMANS’. _The curtains are drawn over the middle
      doorway, and also over the glass door. The lamp, half turned down,
      and with a shade over it, is burning on the table. In the stove,
      the door of which stands open, there has been a fire, which is now
      nearly burnt out._

MRS. ELVSTED, _wrapped in a large shawl, and with her feet upon a
      foot-rest, sits close to the stove, sunk back in the arm-chair._
      HEDDA, _fully dressed, lies sleeping upon the sofa, with a
      sofa-blanket over her._

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_After a pause, suddenly sits up in her chair, and listens eagerly.
Then she sinks back again wearily, moaning to herself._] Not yet!—Oh
God—oh God—not yet!

  BERTA _slips cautiously in by the hall door. She has a letter in her
                                 hand._

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Turns and whispers eagerly._] Well—has any one come?

                                 BERTA.

[_Softly._] Yes, a girl has just brought this letter.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Quickly, holding out her hand._] A letter! Give it to me!

                                 BERTA.

No, it’s for Dr. Tesman, ma’am.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, indeed.

                                 BERTA.

It was Miss Tesman’s servant that brought it. I’ll lay it here on the
table.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, do.

                                 BERTA.

[_Laying down the letter._] I think I had better put out the lamp. It’s
smoking.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, put it out. It must soon be daylight now.

                                 BERTA.

[_Putting out the lamp._] It is daylight already, ma’am.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, broad day! And no one come back yet——!

                                 BERTA.

Lord bless you, ma’am—I guessed how it would be.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

You guessed?

                                 BERTA.

Yes, when I saw that a certain person had come back to town—and that he
went off with them. For we’ve heard enough about that gentleman before
now.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Don’t speak so loud. You will waken Mrs. Tesman.

                                 BERTA.

[_Looks towards the sofa and sighs._] No, no—let her sleep, poor thing.
Shan’t I put some wood on the fire?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Thanks, not for me.

                                 BERTA.

Oh, very well.

                                [_She goes softly out by the hall door._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Is wakened by the shutting of the door, and looks up._] What’s that——?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

It was only the servant——

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looking about her._] Oh, we’re here——! Yes, now I remember. [_Sits
erect upon the sofa, stretches herself, and rubs her eyes._] What
o’clock is it, Thea?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Looks at her watch._] It’s past seven.

                                 HEDDA.

When did Tesman come home?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

He has not come.

                                 HEDDA.

Not come home yet?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Rising._] No one has come.

                                 HEDDA.

Think of our watching and waiting here till four in the morning——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Wringing her hands._] And _how_ I watched and waited for him!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Yawns, and says with her hand before her mouth._] Well well—we might
have spared ourselves the trouble.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Did you get a little sleep?

                                 HEDDA.

Oh yes; I believe I have slept pretty well. Have you not?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Not for a moment. I couldn’t, Hedda!—not to save my life.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Rises and goes towards her._] There there there! There’s nothing to be
so alarmed about. I understand quite well what has happened.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Well, what do you think? Won’t you tell me?

                                 HEDDA.

Why, of course it has been a very late affair at Judge Brack’s——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, yes—that is clear enough. But all the same——

                                 HEDDA.

And then, you see, Tesman hasn’t cared to come home and ring us up in
the middle of the night. [_Laughing._] Perhaps he wasn’t inclined to
show himself either—immediately after a jollification.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

But in that case—where can he have gone?

                                 HEDDA.

Of course he has gone to his Aunts’ and slept there. They have his old
room ready for him.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

No, he can’t be with _them_; for a letter has just come for him from
Miss Tesman. There it lies.

                                 HEDDA.

Indeed? [_Looks at the address._] Why yes, it’s addressed in Aunt
Julia’s own hand. Well then, he has remained at Judge Brack’s. And as
for Eilert Lövborg—he is sitting, with vine leaves in his hair, reading
his manuscript.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh Hedda, you are just saying things you don’t believe a bit.

                                 HEDDA.

You really are a little blockhead, Thea.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh yes, I suppose I am.

                                 HEDDA.

And how mortally tired you look.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, I am mortally tired.

                                 HEDDA.

Well then, you must do as I tell you. You must go into my room and lie
down for a little while.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh no, no—I shouldn’t be able to sleep.

                                 HEDDA.

I am sure you would.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Well, but your husband is certain to come soon now; and then I want to
know at once——

                                 HEDDA.

I shall take care to let you know when he comes.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Do you promise me, Hedda?

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, rely upon me. Just you go in and have a sleep in the meantime.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Thanks; then I’ll try to.

                                 [_She goes off through the inner room._

          [HEDDA _goes up to the glass door and draws back the curtains.
            The broad daylight streams into the room. Then she takes a
            little hand-glass from the writing-table, looks at herself
            in it, and arranges her hair. Next she goes to the hall door
            and presses the bell-button._

ce BERTA _presently appears at the hall door._

                                 BERTA.

Did you want anything, ma’am?

                                 HEDDA.

Yes; you must put some more wood in the stove. I am shivering.

                                 BERTA.

Bless me—I’ll make up the fire at once. [_She rakes the embers together
and lays a piece of wood upon them; then stops and listens._] That was a
ring at the front door, ma’am.

                                 HEDDA.

Then go to the door. I will look after the fire.

                                 BERTA.

It’ll soon burn up.

                   [_She goes out by the hall door._

          [HEDDA _kneels on the foot-rest and lays some more pieces of
            wood in the stove._

_After a short pause,_ GEORGE TESMAN _enters from the hall. He looks
    tired and rather serious. He steals on tiptoe towards the middle
    doorway and is about to slip through the curtains._

                                 HEDDA.

[_At the stove, without looking up._] Good morning.

                                TESMAN.

[_Turns._] Hedda! [_Approaching her._] Good heavens—are you up so early?
Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, I am up very early this morning.

                                TESMAN.

And I never doubted you were still sound asleep. Fancy that, Hedda!

                                 HEDDA.

Don’t speak so loud. Mrs. Elvsted is resting in my room.

                                TESMAN.

Has Mrs. Elvsted been here all night?

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, since no one came to fetch her.

                                TESMAN.

Ah, to be sure.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Closes the door of the stove and rises._] Well, did you enjoy
yourselves at Judge Brack’s?

                                TESMAN.

Have you been anxious about me? Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

No, I should never think of being anxious. But I asked if you had
enjoyed yourself.

                                TESMAN.

Oh yes,—for once in a way. Especially the beginning of the evening; for
then Eilert read me part of his book. We arrived more than an hour too
early—fancy that! And Brack had all sorts of arrangements to make—so
Eilert read to me.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Seating herself by the table on the right._] Well? Tell me, then——

                                TESMAN.

[_Sitting on a footstool near the stove._] Oh Hedda, you can’t conceive
what a book that is going to be! I believe it is one of the most
remarkable things that have ever been written. Fancy that!

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, yes; I don’t care about that——

                                TESMAN.

I must make a confession to you, Hedda. When he had finished reading—a
horrid feeling came over me.

                                 HEDDA.

A horrid feeling?

                                TESMAN.

I felt jealous of Eilert for having had it in him to write such a book.
Only think, Hedda!

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, yes, I am thinking!

                                TESMAN.

And then how pitiful to think that he—with all his gifts—should be
irreclaimable, after all.

                                 HEDDA.

I suppose you mean that he has more courage than the rest?

                                TESMAN.

No, not at all—I mean that he is incapable of taking his pleasures in
moderation.

                                 HEDDA.

And what came of it all—in the end?

                                TESMAN.

Well, to tell the truth, I think it might best be described as an orgie,
Hedda.

                                 HEDDA.

Had he vine-leaves in his hair?

                                TESMAN.

Vine-leaves? No, I saw nothing of the sort. But he made a long, rambling
speech in honour of the woman who had inspired him in his work—that was
the phrase he used.

                                 HEDDA.

Did he name her?

                                TESMAN.

No, he didn’t; but I can’t help thinking he meant Mrs. Elvsted. You may
be sure he did.

                                 HEDDA.

Well—where did you part from him?

                                TESMAN.

On the way to town. We broke up—the last of us at any rate—all together;
and Brack came with us to get a breath of fresh air. And then, you see,
we agreed to take Eilert home; for he had had far more than was good for
him.

                                 HEDDA.

I daresay.

                                TESMAN.

But now comes the strange part of it, Hedda; or, I should rather say,
the melancholy part of it. I declare I am almost ashamed—on Eilert’s
account—to tell you——

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, go on——!

                                TESMAN.

Well, as we were getting near town, you see, I happened to drop a little
behind the others. Only for a minute or two—fancy that!

                                 HEDDA.

Yes yes yes, but——?

                                TESMAN.

And then, as I hurried after them—what do you think I found by the
wayside? Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, how should I know!

                                TESMAN.

You mustn’t speak of it to a soul, Hedda! Do you hear! Promise me, for
Eilert’s sake. [_Draws a parcel, wrapped in paper, from his coat
pocket._] Fancy, dear—I found this.

                                 HEDDA.

Is not that the parcel he had with him yesterday?

                                TESMAN.

Yes, it is the whole of his precious, irreplaceable manuscript! And he
had gone and lost it, and knew nothing about it. Only fancy, Hedda! So
deplorably——

                                 HEDDA.

But why did you not give him back the parcel at once?

                                TESMAN.

I didn’t dare to—in the state he was then in——

                                 HEDDA.

Did you not tell any of the others that you had found it?

                                TESMAN.

Oh, far from it! You can surely understand that, for Eilert’s sake, I
wouldn’t do that.

                                 HEDDA.

So no one knows that Eilert Lövborg’s manuscript is in your possession?

                                TESMAN.

No. And no one _must_ know it.

                                 HEDDA.

Then what did you say to him afterwards?

                                TESMAN.

I didn’t talk to him again at all; for when we got in among the streets,
he and two or three of the others gave us the slip and disappeared.
Fancy that!

                                 HEDDA.

Indeed! They must have taken him home then.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, so it would appear. And Brack, too, left us.

                                 HEDDA.

And what have you been doing with yourself since?

                                TESMAN.

Well, I and some of the others went home with one of the party, a jolly
fellow, and took our morning coffee with him; or perhaps I should rather
call it our night coffee—eh? But now, when I have rested a little, and
given Eilert, poor fellow, time to have his sleep out, I must take this
back to him.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Holds out her hand for the packet._] No—don’t give it to him! Not in
such a hurry, I mean. Let me read it first.

                                TESMAN.

No, my dearest Hedda, I mustn’t, I really mustn’t.

                                 HEDDA.

You must not?

                                TESMAN.

No—for you can imagine what a state of despair he will be in when he
wakens and misses the manuscript. He has no copy of it, you must know!
He told me so.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looking searchingly at him._] Can such a thing not be reproduced?
Written over again?

                                TESMAN.

No, I don’t think that would be possible. For the inspiration, you see——

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, yes—I suppose it depends on that——[_Lightly._] But, by-the-bye—here
is a letter for you.

                                TESMAN.

Fancy——!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Handing it to him._] It came early this morning.

                                TESMAN.

It’s from Aunt Julia! What can it be? [_He lays the packet on the other
footstool, opens the letter, runs his eye through it, and jumps up._]
Oh, Hedda—she says that poor Aunt Rina is dying!

                                 HEDDA.

Well, we were prepared for that.

                                TESMAN.

And that if I want to see her again, I must make haste. I’ll run in to
them at once.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Suppressing a smile._] Will you run?

                                TESMAN.

Oh, my dearest Hedda—if you could only make up your mind to come with
me! Just think!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Rises and says wearily, repelling the idea._] No, no, don’t ask me. I
_will_ not look upon sickness and death. I loathe all sorts of ugliness.

                                TESMAN.

Well, well, then——! [_Bustling around._] My hat——? My overcoat——? Oh, in
the hall——. I do hope I mayn’t come too late, Hedda! Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, if you run———

                                      [_BERTA appears at the hall door._

                                 BERTA.

Judge Brack is at the door, and wishes to know if he may come in.

                                TESMAN.

At this time! No, I can’t possibly see him.

                                 HEDDA.

But I can. [_To BERTA._] Ask Judge Brack to come in.

                                                      [_BERTA goes out._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Quickly, whispering._] The parcel, Tesman!

                                   [_She snatches it up from the stool._

                                TESMAN.

Yes, give it to me!

                                 HEDDA.

No, no, I will keep it till you come back.

      [_She goes to the writing-table and places it in the bookcase._
        TESMAN _stands in a flurry of haste, and cannot get his gloves
        on._

_JUDGE BRACK enters from the hall._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Nodding to him._] You are an early bird, I must say.

                                 BRACK.

Yes, don’t you think so? [_To TESMAN._] Are you on the move, too?

                                TESMAN.

Yes, I _must_ rush off to my aunts’. Fancy—the invalid one is lying at
death’s door, poor creature.

                                 BRACK.

Dear me, is she indeed? Then on no account let me detain you. At such a
critical moment——

                                TESMAN.

Yes, I must really rush——Good-bye! Good-bye!

                                     [_He hastens out by the hall door._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Approaching._] You seem to have made a particularly lively night of it
at your rooms, Judge Brack.

                                 BRACK.

I assure you I have not had my clothes off, Mrs. Hedda.

                                 HEDDA.

Not you, either?

                                 BRACK.

No, as you may see. But what has Tesman been telling you of the night’s
adventures?

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, some tiresome story. Only that they went and had coffee somewhere or
other.

                                 BRACK.

I have heard about that coffee-party already. Eilert Lövborg was not
with them, I fancy?

                                 HEDDA.

No, they had taken him home before that.

                                 BRACK.

Tesman too?

                                 HEDDA.

No, but some of the others, he said.

                                 BRACK.

[_Smiling._] George Tesman is really an ingenuous creature, Mrs. Hedda.

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, heaven knows he is. Then is there something behind all this?

                                 BRACK.

Yes, perhaps there may be.

                                 HEDDA.

Well then, sit down, my dear Judge, and tell your story in comfort.

[_She seats herself to the left of the table. BRACK sits near her, at
the long side of the table._

                                 HEDDA.

Now then?

                                 BRACK.

I had special reasons for keeping track of my guests—or rather of some
of my guests—last night.

                                 HEDDA.

Of Eilert Lövborg among the rest, perhaps?

                                 BRACK.

Frankly—yes.

                                 HEDDA.

Now you make me really curious——

                                 BRACK.

Do you know where he and one or two of the others finished the night,
Mrs. Hedda?

                                 HEDDA.

If it is not quite unmentionable, tell me.

                                 BRACK.

Oh no, it’s not at all unmentionable. Well, they put in an appearance at
a particularly animated soirée.

                                 HEDDA.

Of the lively kind?

                                 BRACK.

Of the very liveliest——

                                 HEDDA.

Tell me more of this, Judge Brack——

                                 BRACK.

Lövborg, as well as the others, had been invited in advance. I knew all
about it. But he had declined the invitation; for now, as you know, he
has become a new man.

                                 HEDDA.

Up at the Elvsteds’, yes. But he went after all, then?

                                 BRACK.

Well, you see, Mrs. Hedda—unhappily the spirit moved him at my rooms
last evening——

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, I hear he found inspiration.

                                 BRACK.

Pretty violent inspiration. Well, I fancy that altered his purpose; for
we menfolk are unfortunately not always so firm in our principles as we
ought to be.

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, I am sure _you_ are an exception, Judge Brack. But as to Lövborg——?

                                 BRACK.

To make a long story short—he landed at last in Mademoiselle Diana’s
rooms.

                                 HEDDA.

Mademoiselle Diana’s?

                                 BRACK.

It was Mademoiselle Diana that was giving the soirée, to a select circle
of her admirers and her lady friends.

                                 HEDDA.

Is she a red-haired woman?

                                 BRACK.

Precisely.

                                 HEDDA.

A sort of a—singer?

                                 BRACK.

Oh yes—in her leisure moments. And moreover a mighty huntress—of
men—Mrs. Hedda. You have no doubt heard of her. Eilert Lövborg was one
of her most enthusiastic protectors—in the days of his glory.

                                 HEDDA.

And how did all this end?

                                 BRACK.

Far from amicably, it appears. After a most tender meeting, they seem to
have come to blows——

                                 HEDDA.

Lövborg and she?

                                 BRACK.

Yes. He accused her or her friends of having robbed him. He declared
that his pocket-book had disappeared—and other things as well. In short,
he seems to have made a furious disturbance.

                                 HEDDA.

And what came of it all?

                                 BRACK.

It came to a general scrimmage, in which the ladies as well as the
gentlemen took part. Fortunately the police at last appeared on the
scene.

                                 HEDDA.

The police too?

                                 BRACK.

Yes. I fancy it will prove a costly frolic for Eilert Lövborg, crazy
being that he is.

                                 HEDDA.

How so?

                                 BRACK.

He seems to have made a violent resistance—to have hit one of the
constables on the head and torn the coat off his back. So they had to
march him off to the police-station with the rest.

                                 HEDDA.

How have you learnt all this?

                                 BRACK.

From the police themselves.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Gazing straight before her._] So that is what happened. Then he had no
vine-leaves in his hair.

                                 BRACK.

Vine-leaves, Mrs. Hedda?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Changing her tone._] But tell me now, Judge—what is your real reason
for tracking out Eilert Lövborg’s movements so carefully?

                                 BRACK.

In the first place, it could not be entirely indifferent to me if it
should appear in the police-court that he came straight from my house.

                                 HEDDA.

Will the matter come into court then?

                                 BRACK.

Of course. However, I should scarcely have troubled so much about that.
But I thought that, as a friend of the family, it was my duty to supply
you and Tesman with a full account of his nocturnal exploits.

                                 HEDDA.

Why so, Judge Brack?

                                 BRACK.

Why, because I have a shrewd suspicion that he intends to use you as a
sort of blind.

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, how can you think such a thing!

                                 BRACK.

Good heavens, Mrs. Hedda—we have eyes in our head. Mark my words! This
Mrs. Elvsted will be in no hurry to leave town again.

                                 HEDDA.

Well, even if there should be anything between them, I suppose there are
plenty of other places where they could meet.

                                 BRACK.

Not a single _home_. Henceforth, as before, every respectable house will
be closed against Eilert Lövborg.

                                 HEDDA.

And so ought mine to be, you mean?

                                 BRACK.

Yes. I confess it would be more than painful to me if this personage
were to be made free of your house. How superfluous, how intrusive, he
would be, if he were to force his way into——

                                 HEDDA.

——into the triangle?

                                 BRACK.

Precisely. It would simply mean that I should find myself homeless.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looks at him with a smile._] So you want to be the one cock in the
basket[24]—that is your aim.

                                 BRACK.

[_Nods slowly and lowers his voice._] Yes, that is my aim. And for that
I will fight—with every weapon I can command.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Her smile vanishing._] I see you are a dangerous person—when it comes
to the point.

                                 BRACK.

Do you think so?

                                 HEDDA.

I am beginning to think so. And I am exceedingly glad to think—that you
have no sort of hold over me.

                                 BRACK.

[_Laughing equivocally._] Well well, Mrs. Hedda—perhaps you are right
there. If I had, who knows what I might be capable of?

                                 HEDDA.

Come come now, Judge Brack! That sounds almost like a threat.

                                 BRACK.

[_Rising._] Oh, not at all! The triangle, you know, ought, if possible,
to be spontaneously constructed.

                                 HEDDA.

There I agree with you.

                                 BRACK.

Well, now I have said all I had to say; and I had better be getting back
to town. Good-bye, Mrs. Hedda.

                                      [_He goes towards the glass door._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Rising._] Are you going through the garden?

                                 BRACK.

Yes, it’s a short cut for me.

                                 HEDDA.

And then it is a back way, too.

                                 BRACK.

Quite so. I have no objection to back ways. They may be piquant enough
at times.

                                 HEDDA.

When there is ball practice going on, you mean?

                                 BRACK.

[_In the doorway, laughing to her._] Oh, people don’t shoot their tame
poultry, I fancy.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Also laughing._] Oh no, when there is only one cock in the basket——

          [_They exchange laughing nods of farewell. He goes. She closes
            the door behind him._

          [HEDDA, _who has become quite serious, stands for a moment
            looking out. Presently she goes and peeps through the
            curtain over the middle doorway. Then she goes to the
            writing-table, takes_ LÖVBORG’S _packet out of the bookcase,
            and is on the point of looking through its contents._ BERTA
            _is heard speaking loudly in the hall._ HEDDA _turns and
            listens. Then she hastily locks up the packet in the drawer,
            and lays the key on the inkstand._

EILERT LÖVBORG, _with his greatcoat on and his hat in his hand, tears
    open the hall door. He looks somewhat confused and irritated._

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Looking towards the hall._] And I tell you I must and will come in!
There!

          [_He closes the door, turns, sees_ HEDDA, _at once regains his
            self-control, and bows._

                                 HEDDA.

[_At the writing table._] Well, Mr. Lövborg, this is rather a late hour
to call for Thea.

                                LÖVBORG.

You mean rather an early hour to call on you. Pray pardon me.

                                 HEDDA.

How do you know that she is still here?

                                LÖVBORG.

They told me at her lodgings that she had been out all night.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Going to the oval table._] Did you notice anything about the people of
the house when they said that?

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Looks inquiringly at her._] Notice anything about them?

                                 HEDDA.

I mean, did they seem to think it odd?

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Suddenly understanding._] Oh yes, of course! I am dragging her down
with me! However, I didn’t notice anything.—I suppose Tesman is not up
yet?

                                 HEDDA.

No—I think not——

                                LÖVBORG.

When did he come home?

                                 HEDDA.

Very late.

                                LÖVBORG.

Did he tell you anything?

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, I gathered that you had had an exceedingly jolly evening at Judge
Brack’s.

                                LÖVBORG.

Nothing more?

                                 HEDDA.

I don’t think so. However, I was so dreadfully sleepy——

   MRS. ELVSTED _enters through the curtains of the middle doorway._

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Going towards him._] Ah, Lövborg! At last——!

                                LÖVBORG.

Yes, at last. And too late!

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Looks anxiously at him._] What is too late?

                                LÖVBORG.

Everything is too late now. It is all over with me.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh no, no—don’t say that!

                                LÖVBORG.

You will say the same when you hear——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

I won’t hear anything!

                                 HEDDA.

Perhaps you would prefer to talk to her alone? If so, I will leave you.

                                LÖVBORG.

No, stay—you too. I beg you to stay.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, but I won’t hear anything, I tell you.

                                LÖVBORG.

It is not last night’s adventures that I want to talk about.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

What is it then——?

                                LÖVBORG.

I want to say that now our ways must part.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Part!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Involuntarily._] I knew it!

                                LÖVBORG.

You can be of no more service to me, Thea.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

How can you stand there and say that! No more service to you! Am I not
to help you now, as before? Are we not to go on working together?

                                LÖVBORG.

Henceforward I shall do no work.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Despairingly._] Then what am I to do with my life?

                                LÖVBORG.

You must try to live your life as if you had never known me.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

But you know I cannot do that!

                                LÖVBORG.

Try if you cannot, Thea. You must go home again——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_In vehement protest._] Never in this world! Where you are, there will
I be also! I will not let myself be driven away like this! I will remain
here! I will be with you when the book appears.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Half aloud, in suspense._] Ah yes—the book!

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Looks at her._] My book and Thea’s; for _that_ is what it is.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, I feel that it is. And that is why I have a right to be with you
when it appears! I will see with my own eyes how respect and honour pour
in upon you afresh. And the happiness—the happiness—oh, I must share it
with you!

                                LÖVBORG.

Thea—our book will never appear.

                                 HEDDA.

Ah!

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Never appear!

                                LÖVBORG.

_Can_ never appear.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_In agonised foreboding._] Lövborg—what have you done with the
manuscript?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looks anxiously at him._] Yes, the manuscript——?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Where is it?

                                LÖVBORG.

Oh Thea—don’t ask me about it!

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, yes, I _will_ know. I demand to be told at once.

                                LÖVBORG.

The manuscript——. Well then—I have torn the manuscript into a thousand
pieces.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Shrieks._] Oh no, no——!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Involuntarily._] But that’s not——

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Looks at her._] Not true, you think?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Collecting herself._] Oh well, of course—since you say so. But it
sounded so improbable——

                                LÖVBORG.

It is true, all the same.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Wringing her hands._] Oh God—oh God, Hedda—torn his own work to
pieces!

                                LÖVBORG.

I have torn my own life to pieces. So why should I not tear my life-work
too——?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

And you did this last night?

                                LÖVBORG.

Yes, I tell you! Tore it into a thousand pieces—and scattered them on
the fiord—far out. There there is cool sea-water at any rate—let them
drift upon it—drift with the current and the wind. And then presently
they will sink—deeper and deeper—as I shall, Thea.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Do you know, Lövborg, that what you have done with the book—I shall
think of it to my dying day as though you had killed a little child.

                                LÖVBORG.

Yes, you are right. It is a sort of child-murder.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

How could you, then——! Did not the child belong to me too?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Almost inaudibly._] Ah, the child——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Breathing heavily._] It is all over then. Well well, now I will go,
Hedda.

                                 HEDDA.

But you are not going away from town?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, I don’t know what I shall do. I see nothing but darkness before me.

                                       [_She goes out by the hall door._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Stands waiting for a moment._] So you are not going to see her home,
Mr. Lövborg?

                                LÖVBORG.

I? Through the streets? Would you have people see her walking with me?

                                 HEDDA.

Of course I don’t know what else may have happened last night. But is it
so utterly irretrievable?

                                LÖVBORG.

It will not end with last night—I know that perfectly well. And the
thing is that now I have no taste for that sort of life either. I won’t
begin it anew. She has broken my courage and my power of braving life
out.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looking straight before her._] So that pretty little fool has had her
fingers in a man’s destiny. [_Looks at him._] But all the same, how
could you treat her so heartlessly?

                                LÖVBORG.

Oh, don’t say that it was heartless!

                                 HEDDA.

To go and destroy what has filled her whole soul for months and years!
You do not call that heartless!

                                LÖVBORG.

To you I can tell the truth, Hedda.

                                 HEDDA.

The truth?

                                LÖVBORG.

First promise me—give me your word—that what I now confide to you Thea
shall never know.

                                 HEDDA.

I give you my word.

                                LÖVBORG.

Good. Then let me tell you that what I said just now was untrue.

                                 HEDDA.

About the manuscript?

                                LÖVBORG.

Yes. I have not torn it to pieces—nor thrown it into the fiord.

                                 HEDDA.

No, no——. But—where is it then?

                                LÖVBORG.

I have destroyed it none the less—utterly destroyed it, Hedda!

                                 HEDDA.

I don’t understand.

                                LÖVBORG.

Thea said that what I had done seemed to her like a child-murder.

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, so she said.

                                LÖVBORG.

But to kill his child—that is not the worst thing a father can do to it.

                                 HEDDA.

Not the worst?

                                LÖVBORG.

No. I wanted to spare Thea from hearing the worst.

                                 HEDDA.

Then what is the worst?

                                LÖVBORG.

Suppose now, Hedda, that a man—in the small hours of the morning—came
home to his child’s mother after a night of riot and debauchery, and
said: ”Listen—I have been here and there—in this place and in that. And
I have taken our child with me—to this place and to that. And I have
lost the child—utterly lost it. The devil knows into what hands it may
have fallen—who may have had their clutches on it.“

                                 HEDDA.

Well—but when all is said and done, you know—this was only a book——

                                LÖVBORG.

Thea’s pure soul was in that book.

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, so I understand.

                                LÖVBORG.

And you can understand, too, that for her and me together no future is
possible.

                                 HEDDA.

What path do you mean to take then?

                                LÖVBORG.

None. I will only try to make an end of it all—the sooner the better.

                                 HEDDA.

[_A step nearer him._] Eilert Lövborg—listen to me.—Will you not try
to—to do it beautifully?

                                LÖVBORG.

Beautifully? [_Smiling._] With vine-leaves in my hair, as you used to
dream in the old days——?

                                 HEDDA.

No, no. I have lost my faith in the the vine-leaves. But beautifully
nevertheless! For once in a way!—Good-bye! You must go now—and do not
come here any more.

                                LÖVBORG.

Good-bye, Mrs. Tesman. And give George Tesman my love.

                                         [_He is on the point of going._

                                 HEDDA.

No, wait! I must give you a memento to take with you.

          [_She goes to the writing-table and opens the drawer and the
            pistol-case; then returns to_ LÖVBORG _with one of the
            pistols._

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Looks at her._] This? Is _this_ the memento?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Nodding slowly._] Do you recognise it? It was aimed at you once.

                                LÖVBORG.

You should have used it then.

                                 HEDDA.

Take it—and do _you_ use it now.

                                LÖVBORG.

[_Puts the pistol in his breast pocket._] Thanks!

                                 HEDDA.

And beautifully, Eilert Lövborg. Promise me that!

                                LÖVBORG.

Good-bye, Hedda Gabler.

          [_He goes out by the hall door._

          [HEDDA _listens for a moment at the door. Then she goes up to
            the writing-table, takes out the packet of manuscript, peeps
            under the cover, draws a few of the sheets half out, and
            looks at them. Next she goes over and seats herself in the
            armchair beside the stove, with the packet in her lap.
            Presently she opens the stove door, and then the packet._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Throws one of the quires into the fire and whispers to herself._] Now
I am burning your child, Thea!—Burning it, curly-locks! [_Throwing one
or two more quires into the stove._] Your child and Eilert Lövborg’s.
[_Throws the rest in._] I am burning—I am burning your child.




                              ACT FOURTH.

_The same rooms at the_ TESMANS’. _It is evening. The drawing-room is in
      darkness. The back room is lighted by the hanging lamp over the
      table. The curtains over the glass door are drawn close._

HEDDA, _dressed in black, walks to and fro in the dark room. Then she
      goes into the back room and disappears for a moment to the left.
      She is heard to strike a few chords on the piano. Presently she
      comes in sight again, and returns to the drawing-room._

BERTA _enters from the right, through the inner room, with a lighted
      lamp, which she places on the table in front of the corner settee
      in the drawing-room. Her eyes are red with weeping, and she has
      black ribbons in her cap. She goes quietly and circumspectly out
      to the right._ HEDDA _goes up to the glass door, lifts the curtain
      a little aside, and looks out into the darkness._

_Shortly afterwards,_ MISS TESMAN, _in mourning, with a bonnet and veil
      on, comes in from the hall._ HEDDA _goes towards her and holds out
      her hand._

                              MISS TESMAN.

Yes, Hedda, here I am, in mourning and forlorn; for now my poor sister
has at last found peace.

                                 HEDDA.

I have heard the news already, as you see. Tesman sent me a card.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Yes, he promised me he would. But nevertheless I thought that to
Hedda—here in the house of life—I ought myself to bring the tidings of
death.

                                 HEDDA.

That was very kind of you.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Ah, Rina ought not to have left us just _now_. This is not the time for
Hedda’s house to be a house of mourning.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Changing the subject._] She died quite peacefully, did she not, Miss
Tesman?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Oh, her end was so calm, so beautiful. And then she had the unspeakable
happiness of seeing George once more—and bidding him good-bye.—Has he
not come home yet?

                                 HEDDA.

No. He wrote that he might be detained. But won’t you sit down?

                              MISS TESMAN.

No thank you, my dear, dear Hedda. I should like to, but I have so much
to do. I must prepare my dear one for her rest as well as I can. She
shall go to her grave looking her best.

                                 HEDDA.

Can I not help you in any way?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Oh, you must not think of it! Hedda Tesman must have no hand in such
mournful work. Nor let her thoughts dwell on it either—not at this time.

                                 HEDDA.

One is not always mistress of one’s thoughts——

                              MISS TESMAN.

[_Continuing._] Ah yes, it is the way of the world. At home we shall be
sewing a shroud; and here there will soon be sewing too, I suppose—but
of another sort, thank God!

                GEORGE TESMAN _enters by the hall door._

                                 HEDDA.

Ah, you have come at last!

                                TESMAN.

You here, Aunt Julia? With Hedda? Fancy that!

                              MISS TESMAN.

I was just going, my dear boy. Well, have you done all you promised?

                                TESMAN.

No; I’m really afraid I have forgotten half of it. I must come to you
again to-morrow. To-day my brain is all in a whirl. I can’t keep my
thoughts together.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Why, my dear George, you mustn’t take it in this way.

                                TESMAN.

Mustn’t——? How do you mean?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Even in your sorrow you must rejoice, as I do—rejoice that she is at
rest.

                                TESMAN.

Oh yes, yes—you are thinking of Aunt Rina.

                                 HEDDA.

You will feel lonely now, Miss Tesman.

                              MISS TESMAN.

Just at first, yes. But that will not last very long, I hope. I daresay
I shall soon find an occupant for poor Rina’s little room.

                                TESMAN.

Indeed? Who do you think will take it? Eh?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Oh, there’s always some poor invalid or other in want of nursing,
unfortunately.

                                 HEDDA.

Would you really take such a burden upon you again?

                              MISS TESMAN.

A burden! Heaven forgive you, child—it has been no burden to me.

                                 HEDDA.

But suppose you had a total stranger on your hands——

                              MISS TESMAN.

Oh, one soon makes friends with sick folk; and it’s such an absolute
necessity for me to have some one to live for. Well, heaven be praised,
there may soon be something in this house, too, to keep an old aunt
busy.

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, don’t trouble about anything here.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, just fancy what a nice time we three might have together, if——?

                                 HEDDA.

If——?

                                TESMAN.

[_Uneasily._] Oh, nothing. It will all come right. Let us hope so—eh?

                              MISS TESMAN.

Well well, I daresay you two want to talk to each other. [_Smiling._]
And perhaps Hedda may have something to tell you too, George. Good-bye!
I must go home to Rina. [_Turning at the door._] How strange it is to
think that now Rina is with me and with my poor brother as well!

_Tesman._

Yes, fancy that, Aunt Julia! Eh?

                               [_MISS TESMAN goes out by the hall door._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Follows TESMAN coldly and searchingly with her eyes._] I almost
believe your Aunt Rina’s death affects _you_ more than it does your Aunt
Julia.

                                TESMAN.

Oh, it’s not that alone. It’s Eilert I am so terribly uneasy about.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Quickly._] Is there anything new about him?

                                TESMAN.

I looked in at his rooms this afternoon, intending to tell him the
manuscript was in safe keeping.

                                 HEDDA.

Well, did you not find him?

                                TESMAN.

No. He wasn’t at home. But afterwards I met Mrs. Elvsted, and she told
me that he had been here early this morning.

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, directly after you had gone.

                                TESMAN.

And he said that he had torn his manuscript to pieces—eh?

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, so he declared.

                                TESMAN.

Why, good heavens, he must have been completely out of his mind! And I
suppose you thought it best not to give it back to him, Hedda?

                                 HEDDA.

No, he did not get it.

                                TESMAN.

But of course you told him that we had it?

                                 HEDDA.

No. [_Quickly._] Did you tell Mrs. Elvsted?

                                TESMAN.

No; I thought I had better not. But you ought to have told him. Fancy,
if, in desperation, he should go and do himself some injury! Let me have
the manuscript, Hedda! I will take it to him at once. Where is it?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Cold and immovable, leaning on the arm-chair._] I have not got it.

                                TESMAN.

Have not got it? What in the world do you mean?

                                 HEDDA.

I have burnt it—every line of it.

                                TESMAN.

[_With a violent movement of terror._] Burnt! Burnt Eilert’s manuscript!

                                 HEDDA.

Don’t scream so. The servant might hear you.

                                TESMAN.

Burnt! Why, good God——! No, no, no! It’s impossible!

                                 HEDDA.

It is so, nevertheless.

                                TESMAN.

Do you know what you have done, Hedda? It’s unlawful appropriation of
lost property. Fancy that! Just ask Judge Brack, and he’ll tell you what
it is.

                                 HEDDA.

I advise you not to speak of it—either to Judge Brack, or to any one
else.

                                TESMAN.

But how could you do anything so unheard-of? What put it into your head?
What possessed you? Answer me that—eh?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Suppressing an almost imperceptible smile._] I did it for your sake,
George.

                                TESMAN.

For my sake!

                                 HEDDA.

This morning, when you told me about what he had read to you——

                                TESMAN.

Yes yes—what then?

                                 HEDDA.

You acknowledged that you envied him his work.

                                TESMAN.

Oh, of course I didn’t mean that literally.

                                 HEDDA.

No matter—I could not bear the idea that any one should throw you into
the shade.

                                TESMAN.

[_In an outburst of mingled doubt and joy._] Hedda! Oh, is this true?
But—but—I never knew you show your love like that before. Fancy that!

                                 HEDDA.

Well, I may as well tell you that—just at this time——[_Impatiently,
breaking off._] No, no; you can ask Aunt Julia. _She_ will tell you,
fast enough.

                                TESMAN.

Oh, I almost think I understand you, Hedda! [_Clasps his hands
together._] Great heavens! do you really mean it! Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

Don’t shout so. The servant might hear.

                                TESMAN.

[_Laughing in irrepressible glee._] The servant! Why, how absurd you
are, Hedda. It’s only my old Berta! Why, I’ll tell Berta myself.

Hedda.

[_Clenching her hands together in desperation._] Oh, it is killing
me,—it is killing me, all this!

                                TESMAN.

What is, Hedda? Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Coldly, controlling herself._] All this—absurdity—George.

                                TESMAN.

Absurdity! Do you see anything absurd in my being overjoyed at the news!
But after all—perhaps I had better not say anything to Berta.

                                 HEDDA.

Oh——why not that too?

                                TESMAN.

No, no, not yet! But I must certainly tell Aunt Julia. And then that you
have begun to call me George too! Fancy that! Oh, Aunt Julia will be so
happy—so happy!

                                 HEDDA.

When she hears that I have burnt Eilert Lövborg’s manuscript—for your
sake?

                                TESMAN.

No, by-the-bye—that affair of the manuscript—of course nobody must know
about that. But that you love me so much,[25] Hedda—Aunt Julia must
really share my joy in that! I wonder, now, whether this sort of thing
is usual in young wives? Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

I think you had better ask Aunt Julia that question too.

                                TESMAN.

I will indeed, some time or other. [_Looks uneasy and downcast again._]
And yet the manuscript—the manuscript! Good God! it is terrible to think
what will become of poor Eilert now.

 _MRS. ELVSTED, dressed as in the first Act, with hat and cloak, enters
                           by the hall door._

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Greets them hurriedly, and says in evident agitation._] Oh, dear
Hedda, forgive my coming again.

                                 HEDDA.

What is the matter with you, Thea?

                                TESMAN.

Something about Eilert Lövborg again—eh?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes! I am dreadfully afraid some misfortune has happened to him.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Seizes her arm._] Ah,—do you think so!

                                TESMAN.

Why, good Lord—what makes you think that, Mrs. Elvsted?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

I heard them talking of him at my boarding-house—just as I came in. Oh,
the most incredible rumours are afloat about him to-day.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, fancy, so I heard too! And I can bear witness that he went straight
home to bed last night. Fancy that!

                                 HEDDA.

Well, what did they say at the boarding-house?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, I couldn’t make out anything clearly. Either they knew nothing
definite, or else——. They stopped talking when they saw me; and I did
not dare to ask.

                                TESMAN.

[_Moving about uneasily._] We must hope—we must hope that you
misunderstood them, Mrs. Elvsted.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

No, no; I am sure it was of him they were talking. And I heard something
about the hospital or——

                                TESMAN.

The hospital?

                                 HEDDA.

No—surely that cannot be!

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, I was in such mortal terror! I went to his lodgings and asked for
him there.

                                 HEDDA.

_You_ could make up your mind to that, Thea!

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

What else could I do? I really could bear the suspense no longer.

                                TESMAN.

But you didn’t find him either—eh?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

No. And the people knew nothing about him. He hadn’t been home since
yesterday afternoon, they said.

                                TESMAN.

Yesterday! Fancy, how could they say that?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, I am sure something terrible must have happened to him.

                                TESMAN.

Hedda dear—how would it be if I were to go and make inquiries——?

                                 HEDDA.

No, no—don’t you mix yourself up in this affair.

JUDGE BRACK, _with his hat in his hand, enters by the hall door, which_
    BERTA _opens, and closes behind him. He looks grave and bows in
    silence._

                                TESMAN.

Oh, is that you, my dear Judge? Eh?

                                 BRACK.

Yes. It was imperative I should see you this evening.

                                TESMAN.

I can see you have heard the news about Aunt Rina?

                                 BRACK.

Yes, that among other things.

                                TESMAN.

Isn’t it sad—eh?

                                 BRACK.

Well, my dear Tesman, that depends on how you look at it.

                                TESMAN.

[_Looks doubtfully at him._] Has anything else happened?

                                 BRACK.

Yes.

                                 HEDDA.

[_In suspense._] Anything sad, Judge Brack?

                                 BRACK.

That, too, depends on how you look at it, Mrs. Tesman.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Unable to restrain her anxiety._] Oh! it is something about Eilert
Lövborg!

                                 BRACK.

[_With a glance at her._] What makes you think that, Madam? Perhaps you
have already heard something——?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_In confusion._] No, nothing at all, but——

                                TESMAN.

Oh, for heaven’s sake, tell us!

                                 BRACK.

[_Shrugging his shoulders._] Well, I regret to say Eilert Lövborg has
been taken to the hospital. He is lying at the point of death.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Shrieks._] Oh God! oh God——!

                                TESMAN.

To the hospital! And at the point of death!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Involuntarily._] So soon then——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Wailing._] And we parted in anger, Hedda!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Whispers._] Thea—Thea—be careful!

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Not heeding her._] I must go to him! I must see him alive!

                                 BRACK.

It is useless, Madam. No one will be admitted.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, at least tell me what has happened to him? What is it?

                                TESMAN.

You don’t mean to say that he has himself——Eh?

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, I am sure he has.

                                TESMAN.

Hedda, how can you——?

                                 BRACK.

[_Keeping his eyes fixed upon her._] Unfortunately you have guessed
quite correctly, Mrs. Tesman.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, how horrible!

                                TESMAN.

Himself, then! Fancy that!

                                 HEDDA.

Shot himself!

                                 BRACK.

Rightly guessed again, Mrs. Tesman.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_With an effort at self-control._] When did it happen, Mr. Brack?

                                 BRACK.

This afternoon—between three and four.

                                TESMAN.

But, good Lord, where did he do it? Eh?

                                 BRACK.

[_With some hesitation._] Where? Well—I suppose at his lodgings.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

No, that cannot be; for I was there between six and seven.

                                 BRACK.

Well then, somewhere else. I don’t know exactly. I only know that he was
found——. He had shot himself—in the breast.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, how terrible! That he should die like that!

                                 HEDDA.

[_To Brack._] Was it in the breast?

                                 BRACK.

Yes—as I told you.

                                 HEDDA.

Not in the temple?

                                 BRACK.

In the breast, Mrs. Tesman.

                                 HEDDA.

Well, well—the breast is a good place, too.

                                 BRACK.

How do you mean, Mrs. Tesman?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Evasively._] Oh, nothing—nothing.

                                TESMAN.

And the wound is dangerous, you say—eh?

                                 BRACK.

Absolutely mortal. The end has probably come by this time.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, yes, I feel it. The end! The end! Oh, Hedda——!

                                TESMAN.

But tell me, how have you learnt all this?

                                 BRACK.

[_Curtly._] Through one of the police. A man I had some business with.

                                 HEDDA.

[_In a clear voice._] At last a deed worth doing!

                                TESMAN.

[_Terrified._] Good heavens, Hedda! what are you saying?

                                 HEDDA.

I say there is beauty in this.

                                 BRACK.

H’m, Mrs. Tesman——

                                TESMAN.

Beauty! Fancy that!

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, Hedda, how can you talk of beauty in such an act!

                                 HEDDA.

Eilert Lövborg has himself made up his account with life. He has had the
courage to do—the one right thing.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

No, you must never think _that_ was how it happened! It must have been
in delirium that he did it.

                                TESMAN.

In despair!

                                 HEDDA.

That he did not. I am certain of that.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, yes! In delirium! Just as when he tore up our manuscript.

                                 BRACK.

[_Starting._] The manuscript? Has he torn that up?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, last night.

                                TESMAN.

[_Whispers softly._] Oh, Hedda, we shall never get over this.

                                 BRACK.

H’m, very extraordinary.

                                TESMAN.

[_Moving about the room._] To think of Eilert going out of the world in
this way! And not leaving behind him the book that would have
immortalised his name——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, if only it could be put together again!

                                TESMAN.

Yes, if it only could! I don’t know what I would not give——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Perhaps it can, Mr. Tesman.

                                TESMAN.

What do you mean?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Searches in the pocket of her dress._] Look here. I have kept all the
loose notes he used to dictate from.

                                 HEDDA.

[_A step forward._] Ah——!

                                TESMAN.

You have kept them, Mrs. Elvsted! Eh?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, I have them here. I put them in my pocket when I left home. Here
they still are——

                                TESMAN.

Oh, do let me see them!

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Hands him a bundle of papers._] But they are in such disorder—all
mixed up.

                                TESMAN.

Fancy, if we could make something out of them, after all! Perhaps if we
two put our heads together——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh yes, at least let us try——

                                TESMAN.

We _will_ manage it! We _must_! I will dedicate my life to this task

                                 HEDDA.

You, George? Your life?

                                TESMAN.

Yes, or rather all the time I can spare. My own collections must wait in
the meantime. Hedda—you understand, eh? I owe this to Eilert’s memory.

                                 HEDDA.

Perhaps.

                                TESMAN.

And so, my dear Mrs. Elvsted, we will give our whole minds to it. There
is no use in brooding over what can’t be undone—eh? We must try to
control our grief as much as possible, and——

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Yes, yes, Mr. Tesman, I will do the best I can.

                                TESMAN.

Well then, come here. I can’t rest until we have looked through the
notes. Where shall we sit? Here? No, in there, in the back room. Excuse
me, my dear Judge. Come with me, Mrs. Elvsted.

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Oh, if only it were possible!

          [TESMAN _and_ MRS. ELVSTED _go into the back room. She takes
            off her hat and cloak. They both sit at the table under the
            hanging lamp, and are soon deep in an eager examination of
            the papers._ HEDDA _crosses to the stove and sits in the
            arm-chair. Presently BRACK goes up to her._

                                 HEDDA.

[_In a low voice._] Oh, what a sense of freedom it gives one, this act
of Eilert Lövborg’s.

                                 BRACK.

Freedom, Mrs. Hedda? Well, of course, it is a release for him——

                                 HEDDA.

I mean for me. It gives me a sense of freedom to know that a deed of
deliberate courage is still possible in this world,—a deed of
spontaneous beauty.

                                 BRACK.

[_Smiling._] H’m—my dear Mrs. Hedda——

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, I know what you are going to say. For you are a kind of specialist
too, like—you know!

                                 BRACK.

[_Looking hard at her._] Eilert Lövborg was more to you than perhaps you
are willing to admit to yourself. Am I wrong?

                                 HEDDA.

I don’t answer such questions. I only know that Eilert Lövborg has had
the courage to live his life after his own fashion. And then—the last
great act, with its beauty! Ah! that he should have the will and the
strength to turn away from the banquet of life—so early.

                                 BRACK.

I am sorry, Mrs. Hedda,—but I fear I must dispel an amiable illusion.

                                 HEDDA.

Illusion?

                                 BRACK.

Which could not have lasted long in any case.

                                 HEDDA.

What do you mean?

                                 BRACK.

Eilert Lövborg did not shoot himself—voluntarily.

                                 HEDDA.

Not voluntarily?

                                 BRACK.

No. The thing did not happen exactly as I told it.

                                 HEDDA.

[_In suspense._] Have you concealed something? What is it?

                                 BRACK.

For poor Mrs. Elvsted’s sake I idealised the facts a little.

                                 HEDDA.

What _are_ the facts?

                                 BRACK.

First, that he is already dead.

                                 HEDDA.

At the hospital?

                                 BRACK.

Yes—without regaining consciousness.

                                 HEDDA.

What more have you concealed?

                                 BRACK.

This—the event did not happen at his lodgings.

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, that can make no difference.

                                 BRACK.

Perhaps it may. For I must tell you—Eilert Lövborg was found shot in—in
Mademoiselle Diana’s boudoir.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Makes a motion as if to rise, but sinks back again._] That is
impossible, Judge Brack! He cannot have been _there_ again to-day.

                                 BRACK.

He was there this afternoon. He went there, he said, to demand the
return of something which they had taken from him. Talked wildly about a
lost child——

                                 HEDDA.

Ah—so that was why——

                                 BRACK.

I thought probably he meant his manuscript; but now I hear he destroyed
that himself. So I suppose it must have been his pocket-book.

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, no doubt. And there—there he was found?

                                 BRACK.

Yes, there. With a pistol in his breast-pocket, discharged. The ball had
lodged in a vital part.

                                 HEDDA.

In the breast—yes.

                                 BRACK.

No—in the bowels.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looks up at him with an expression of loathing._] That too! Oh, what
curse is it that makes everything I touch turn ludicrous and mean?

                                 BRACK.

There is one point more, Mrs. Hedda—another disagreeable feature in the
affair.

                                 HEDDA.

And what is that?

                                 BRACK.

The pistol he carried——

                                 HEDDA.

[_Breathless._] Well? What of it?

                                 BRACK.

He must have stolen it.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Leaps up._] Stolen it! That is not true! He did not steal it!

                                 BRACK.

No other explanation is possible. He _must_ have stolen it——. Hush!

TESMAN _and_ MRS. ELVSTED _have risen from the table in the back room,
    and come into the drawing-room._

                                TESMAN.

[_With the papers in both his hands._] Hedda dear, it is almost
impossible to see under that lamp. Think of that!

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, I am thinking.

                                TESMAN.

Would you mind our sitting at your writing-table—eh?

                                 HEDDA.

If you like. [_Quickly._] No, wait! Let me clear it first!

                                TESMAN.

Oh, you needn’t trouble, Hedda. There is plenty of room.

                                 HEDDA.

No no, let me clear it, I say! I will take these things in and put them
on the piano. There!

          [_She has drawn out an object, covered with sheet music, from
            under the bookcase, places several other pieces of music
            upon it, and carries the whole into the inner room, to the
            left._ TESMAN _lays the scraps of paper on the
            writing-table, and moves the lamp there from the corner
            table. He and_ MRS. ELVSTED _sit down and proceed with their
            work._ HEDDA _returns._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Behind_ MRS. ELVSTED’S _chair, gently ruffling her hair._] Well, my
sweet Thea,—how goes it with Eilert Lövborg’s monument?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Looks dispiritedly up at her._] Oh, it will be terribly hard to put in
order.

                                TESMAN.

We _must_ manage it. I am determined. And arranging other people’s
papers is just the work for me.

          [HEDDA _goes over to the stove, and seats herself on one of
            the footstools._ BRACK _stands over her, leaning on the
            arm-chair._

                                 HEDDA.

[_Whispers._] What did you say about the pistol?

                                 BRACK.

[_Softly._] That he must have stolen it.

                                 HEDDA.

Why stolen it?

                                 BRACK.

Because every other explanation _ought_ to be impossible, Mrs. Hedda.

                                 HEDDA.

Indeed?

                                 BRACK.

[_Glances at her._] Of course Eilert Lövborg was here this morning. Was
he not?

                                 HEDDA.

Yes.

                                 BRACK.

Were you alone with him?

                                 HEDDA.

Part of the time.

                                 BRACK.

Did you not leave the room whilst he was here?

                                 HEDDA.

No.

                                 BRACK.

Try to recollect. Were you not out of the room a moment?

                                 HEDDA.

Yes, perhaps just a moment—out in the hall.

                                 BRACK.

And where was your pistol case during that time?

                                 HEDDA.

I had it locked up in——

                                 BRACK.

Well, Mrs. Hedda?

                                 HEDDA.

The case stood there on the writing-table.

                                 BRACK.

Have you looked since, to see whether both the pistols are there?

                                 HEDDA.

No.

                                 BRACK.

Well, you need not. I saw the pistol found in Lövborg’s pocket, and I
knew it at once as the one I had seen yesterday—and before, too.

                                 HEDDA.

Have you it with you?

                                 BRACK.

No; the police have it.

                                 HEDDA.

What will the police do with it?

                                 BRACK.

Search till they find the owner.

                                 HEDDA.

Do you think they will succeed?

                                 BRACK.

[_Bends over her and whispers._] No, Hedda Gabler—not so long as I say
nothing.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looks frightened at him._] And if you do not say nothing,—what then?

                                 BRACK.

[_Shrugs his shoulders._] There is always the possibility that the
pistol was stolen.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Firmly._] Death rather than that.

                                 BRACK.

[_Smiling._] People say such things—but they don’t do them.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Without replying._] And supposing the pistol was not stolen, and the
owner is discovered? What then?

                                 BRACK.

Well, Hedda—then comes the scandal.

                                 HEDDA.

The scandal!

                                 BRACK.

Yes, the scandal—of which you are so mortally afraid. You will, of
course, be brought before the court—both you and Mademoiselle Diana. She
will have to explain how the thing happened—whether it was an accidental
shot or murder. Did the pistol go off as he was trying to take it out of
his pocket, to threaten her with? Or did she tear the pistol out of his
hand, shoot him, and push it back into his pocket? That would be quite
like her; for she is an able-bodied young person, this same Mademoiselle
Diana.

                                 HEDDA.

But _I_ have nothing to do with all this repulsive business.

                                 BRACK.

No. But you will have to answer the question: Why did you give Eilert
Lövborg the pistol? And what conclusions will people draw from the fact
that you did give it to him?

                                 HEDDA.

[_Lets her head sink._] That is true. I did not think of that.

                                 BRACK.

Well, fortunately, there is no danger, so long as I say nothing.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Looks up at him._] So I am in your power, Judge Brack. You have me at
your beck and call, from this time forward.

                                 BRACK.

[Whispers softly.] Dearest Hedda—believe me—I shall not abuse my
advantage.

                                 HEDDA.

I am in your power none the less. Subject to your will and your demands.
A slave, a slave then! [_Rises impetuously._] No, I cannot endure the
thought of that! Never!

                                 BRACK.

[_Looks half-mockingly at her._] People generally get used to the
inevitable.

                                 HEDDA.

[_Returns his look._] Yes, perhaps. [_She crosses to the writing-table.
Suppressing an involuntary smile, she imitates TESMAN’S intonations._]
Well? Are you getting on, George? Eh?

                                TESMAN.

Heaven knows, dear. In any case it will be the work of months.

                                 HEDDA.

[_As before._] Fancy that! [_Passes her hands softly through MRS.
ELVSTED’S hair._] Doesn’t it seem strange to you, Thea? Here are you
sitting with Tesman—just as you used to sit with Eilert Lövborg?

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

Ah, if I could only inspire your husband in the same way!

                                 HEDDA.

Oh, that will come too—in time.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, do you know, Hedda—I really think I begin to feel something of the
sort. But won’t you go and sit with Brack again?

                                 HEDDA.

Is there nothing I can do to help you two?

                                TESMAN.

No, nothing in the world. [_Turning his head._] I trust to you to keep
Hedda company, my dear Brack!

                                 BRACK.

[_With a glance at HEDDA._] With the very greatest of pleasure.

                                 HEDDA.

Thanks. But I am tired this evening. I will go in and lie down a little
on the sofa.

                                TESMAN.

Yes, do dear—eh?

          [HEDDA _goes into the back room and draws the curtains. A
            short pause. Suddenly she is heard playing a wild dance on
            the piano._

                             MRS. ELVSTED.

[_Starts from her chair._] Oh—what is that?

                                TESMAN.

[_Runs to the doorway._] Why, my dearest Hedda—don’t play dance-music
to-night! Just think of Aunt Rina! And of Eilert too!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Puts her head out between the curtains._] And of Aunt Julia. And of
all the rest of them.—After this, I will be quiet. [_Closes the curtains
again._]

                                TESMAN.

[_At the writing-table._] It’s not good for her to see us at this
distressing work. I’ll tell you what, Mrs. Elvsted,—you shall take the
empty room at Aunt Julia’s, and then I will come over in the evenings,
and we can sit and work _there_—eh?

                                 HEDDA.

[_In the inner room._] I hear what you are saying, Tesman. But how am
_I_ to get through the evenings out here?

                                TESMAN.

[_Turning over the papers._] Oh, I daresay Judge Brack will be so kind
as to look in now and then, even though I am out.

                                 BRACK.

[_In the arm-chair, calls out gaily._] Every blessëd evening, with all
the pleasure in life, Mrs. Tesman! We shall get on capitally together,
we two!

                                 HEDDA.

[_Speaking loud and clear._] Yes, don’t you flatter yourself we will,
Judge Brack? Now that you are the one cock in the basket——

          [_A shot is heard within._ TESMAN, MRS. ELVSTED, _and_ BRACK
            _leap to their feet._

                                TESMAN.

Oh, now she is playing with those pistols again.

          [_He throws back the curtains and runs in, followed by_ MRS.
            ELVSTED. HEDDA _lies stretched on the sofa, lifeless.
            Confusion and cries._ BERTA _enters in alarm from the
            right._

                                TESMAN.

[_Shrieks to BRACK._] Shot herself! Shot herself in the temple! Fancy
that!

                                 BRACK.

[_Half-fainting in the arm-chair._] Good God!—people don’t _do_ such
things.

-----

Footnote 13:

  Pronounce _Reena_.

Footnote 14:

  In the original, ”Statsrådinde Falks villa“—showing that it had
  belonged to the widow of a cabinet minister.

Footnote 15:

  _Du_ = thou; Tesman means, “If you could persuade yourself to
  _tutoyer_ her.”

Footnote 16:

  See footnote, p. 27.

Footnote 17:

  Pronounce _Tora_ and _Taya_.

Footnote 18:

  Mrs. Elvsted here uses the formal pronoun _De_, whereupon Hedda
  rebukes her. In her next speech Mrs. Elvsted says _du_.

Footnote 19:

  “Bagveje” means both “back ways” and “underhand courses.”

Footnote 20:

  As this form of address is contrary to English usage, and as the note
  of familiarity would be lacking in “Mrs. Tesman,” Brack may, in stage
  representation, say “Miss Hedda,” thus ignoring her marriage and
  reverting to the form of address no doubt customary between them of
  old.

Footnote 21:

  He uses the familiar _du_.

Footnote 22:

  From this point onward Lövborg uses the formal _De_.

Footnote 23:

  In this speech he once more says _du_. Hedda addresses him throughout
  as _De_.

Footnote 24:

  ”Eneste hane i kurven“—a proverbial saying.

Footnote 25:

  Literally, “That you burn for me.”




                           THE MASTER BUILDER

                                 (1892)




                               CHARACTERS

 HALVARD SOLNESS, _Master Builder_.
 ALINE SOLNESS, _his wife_.
 DOCTOR HERDAL, _physician_.
 KNUT BROVIK, _formerly an architect, now in_ SOLNESS’S employment.
 RAGNAR BROVIK, _his son, draughtsman_.
 KAIA FOSLI, _his niece, book-keeper_.
 MISS HILDA WANGEL.
 _Some Ladies._
 _A Crowd in the street._

           _The action passes in and about SOLNESS’S house._




                          THE MASTER BUILDER.

                          PLAY IN THREE ACTS.


                                -------




                               ACT FIRST.

_A plainly-furnished work-room in the house of_ HALVARD SOLNESS.
      _Folding doors on the left lead out to the hall. On the right is
      the door leading to the inner rooms of the house. At the back is
      an open door into the draughtsmen’s office. In front, on the left,
      a desk with books, papers and writing materials. Further back than
      the folding door, a stove. In the right-hand corner, a sofa, a
      table, and one or two chairs. On the table a water-bottle and
      glass. A smaller table, with a rocking-chair and arm-chair, in
      front on the right. Lighted lamps, with shades, on the table in
      the draughtsmen’s office, on the table in the corner, and on the
      desk._

_In the draughtsmen’s office sit_ KNUT BROVIK _and his son_ RAGNAR,
      _occupied with plans and calculations. At the desk in the outer
      office stands_ KAIA FOSLI, _writing in the ledger._ KNUT BROVICK
      _is a spare old man with white hair and beard. He wears a rather
      threadbare but well-brushed black coat, spectacles, and a somewhat
      discoloured white neckcloth._ RAGNAR BROVIK _is a well-dressed,
      light-haired man in his thirties, with a slight stoop._ KAIA FOSLI
      _is a slightly built girl, a little over twenty, carefully
      dressed, and delicate-looking. She has a green shade over her
      eyes.—All three go on working for some time in silence._

                              KNUT BROVIK.

[_Rises suddenly, as if in distress, from the table; breathes heavily
and laboriously as he comes forward into the doorway._] No, I can’t bear
it much longer!

                                 KAIA.

[_Going up to him._] You are feeling very ill this evening, are you not,
uncle?

                                BROVIK.

Oh, I seem to get worse every day.

                                RAGNAR.

[_Has risen and advances._] You ought to go home, father. Try to get a
little sleep——

                                BROVIK.

[_Impatiently._] Go to bed, I suppose? Would you have me stifled
outright?

                                 KAIA.

Then take a little walk.

                                RAGNAR.

Yes, do. I will come with you.

                                BROVIK.

[_With warmth._] I will not go till he comes! I am determined to have it
out this evening with—[_in a tone of suppressed bitterness_]—with
him—with the chief.

                                 KAIA.

[_Anxiously._] Oh no, uncle,—do wait awhile before doing _that_!

                                RAGNAR.

Yes, better wait, father!

                                BROVIK.

[_Draws his breath laboriously._] Ha—ha—! _I_ haven’t much time for
waiting.

                                 KAIA.

[_Listening._] Hush! I hear him on the stairs.

          [_All three go back to their work. A short silence._

HALVARD SOLNESS _comes in through the hall door. He is a man no longer
    young, but healthy and vigorous, with close-cut curly hair, dark
    moustache and dark thick eyebrows. He wears a greyish-green buttoned
    jacket with an upstanding collar and broad lappels. On his head he
    wears a soft grey felt hat, and he has one or two light portfolios
    under his arm._

                                SOLNESS.

[_Near the door, points towards the draughtsmen’s office, and asks in a
whisper_:] Are they gone?

                                 KAIA.

[_Softly, shaking her head._] No.

          [_She takes the shade off her eyes._ SOLNESS _crosses the
            room, throws his hat on a chair, places the portfolios on
            the table by the sofa, and approaches the desk again._ KAIA
            _goes on writing without intermission, but seems nervous and
            uneasy._

                                SOLNESS.

[_Aloud._] What is that you are entering, Miss Fosli?

                                 KAIA.

[_Starts._] Oh, it is only something that——

                                SOLNESS.

Let me look at it, Miss Fosli. [_Bends over her, pretends to be looking
into the ledger, and whispers_:] Kaia!

                                 KAIA.

[_Softly, still writing._] Well?

                                SOLNESS.

Why do you always take that shade off when I come?

                                 KAIA.

[_As before._] I look so ugly with it on.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Smiling._] Then you don’t like to look ugly, Kaia?

                                 KAIA.

[_Half glancing up at him._] Not for all the world. Not in _your_ eyes.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Strokes her hair gently._] Poor, poor little Kaia——

                                 KAIA.

[_Bending her head._] Hush—they can hear you!

          [SOLNESS _strolls across the room to the right, turns and
            pauses at the door of the draughtsmen’s office._

                                SOLNESS.

Has any one been here for me?

                                RAGNAR.

[_Rising._] Yes, the young couple who want a villa built, out at
Lövstrand.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Growling._] Oh, _those_ two! _They_ must wait. I am not quite clear
about the plans yet.

                                RAGNAR.

[_Advancing, with some hesitation._] They were very anxious to have the
drawings at once.

                                SOLNESS.

[_As before._] Yes, of course—so they all are.

                                BROVIK.

[_Looks up._] They say they are longing so to get into a house of their
own.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, yes—we know all _that_! And so they are content to take whatever is
offered them. They get a—a roof over their heads—an address—but nothing
to call a home. No thank you! In that case, let them apply to somebody
else. Tell them _that_, the next time they call.

                                BROVIK.

[_Pushes his glasses up on to his forehead and looks in astonishment at
him._] To somebody else? Are you prepared to give up the commission?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Impatiently._] Yes, yes, yes, devil take it! If that is to be the way
of it——. Rather that, than build away at random. [_Vehemently._]
Besides, I know very little about these people as yet.

                                BROVIK.

The people are safe enough. Ragnar knows them. He is a friend of the
family. Perfectly safe people.

                                SOLNESS.

Oh, safe—safe enough! That is not at all what I mean. Good lord—don’t
_you_ understand me either? [_Angrily._] I won’t have anything to do
with these strangers. They may apply to whom they please, so far as I am
concerned.

                                BROVIK.

[_Rising._] Do you really mean _that_?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Sulkily._] Yes I do.—For once in a way.

                                                    [_He comes forward._

          [BROVIK _exchanges a glance with_ RAGNAR, _who makes a warning
            gesture. Then_ BROVIK _comes into the front room._

                                BROVIK.

May I have a few words with you?

                                SOLNESS.

Certainly.

                                BROVIK.

[_To KAIA._] Just go in there for a moment, KAIA.

                                 KAIA.

[_Uneasily._] Oh, but uncle——

                                BROVIK.

Do as I say, child. And shut the door after you.

          [KAIA _goes reluctantly into the draughtsmen’s office, glances
            anxiously and imploringly at_ SOLNESS, _and shuts the door._

                                BROVIK.

[_Lowering his voice a little._] I don’t want the poor children to know
how ill I am.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, you have been looking very poorly of late.

                                BROVIK.

It will soon be all over with me. My strength is ebbing—from day to day.

                                SOLNESS.

Won’t you sit down?

                                BROVIK.

Thanks—may I?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Placing the arm-chair more conveniently._] Here—take this chair.—And
now?

                                BROVIK.

[_Has seated himself with difficulty._] Well, you see, it’s about
Ragnar. That is what weighs most upon me. What is to become of him?

                                SOLNESS.

Of course your son will stay with me as long as ever he likes.

                                BROVIK.

But that is just what he does not like. He feels that he cannot stay
here any longer.

                                SOLNESS.

Why, I should say he was very well off here. But if he wants more money,
I should not mind——

                                BROVIK.

No, no! It is not _that_. [_Impatiently._] But sooner or later he, too,
must have a chance of doing something on his own account.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Without looking at him._] Do you think that Ragnar has quite talent
enough to stand alone?

                                BROVIK.

No, that is just the heartbreaking part of it—I have begun to have my
doubts about the boy. For you have never said so much as—as one
encouraging word about him. And yet I cannot but think there must be
something in him—he _can’t_ be without talent.

                                SOLNESS.

Well, but he has learnt nothing—nothing thoroughly, I mean. Except, of
course, to draw.

                                BROVIK.

[_Looks at him with covert hatred, and says hoarsely._] _You_ had
learned little enough of the business when you were in my employment.
But that did not prevent you from setting to work—[_breathing with
difficulty_]—and pushing your way up, and taking the wind out of my
sails—mine, and so many other people’s.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, you see—circumstances favoured me.

                                BROVIK.

You are right there. Everything favoured you. But then how can you have
the heart to let me go to my grave—without having seen what Ragnar is
fit for? And of course I am anxious to see them married, too—before I
go.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Sharply._] Is it she who wishes it?

                                BROVIK.

Not Kaia so much as Ragnar—he talks about it everyday. [_Appealingly._]
You must—you _must_ help him to get some independent work now! I _must_
see something that the lad has done. Do you hear?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Peevishly._] Hang it, man, you can’t expect me to drag commissions
down from the moon for him!

                                BROVIK.

He has the chance of a capital commission at this very moment. A big bit
of work.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Uneasily, startled._] Has he?

                                BROVIK.

If _you_ would give your consent.

                                SOLNESS.

What sort of work do you mean?

                                BROVIK.

[_With some hesitation._] He can have the building of that villa out at
Lövstrand.

                                SOLNESS.

_That_! Why I am going to build that myself.

                                BROVIK.

Oh _you_ don’t much care about doing it.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Flaring up._] Don’t care! I! Who dares to say that?

                                BROVIK.

You said so yourself just now.

                                SOLNESS.

Oh, never mind what I _say_.—Would they give Ragnar the building of that
villa?

                                BROVIK.

Yes. You see, he knows the family. And then—just for the fun of the
thing—he has made drawings and estimates and so forth——

                                SOLNESS.

Are they pleased with the drawings? The people who will have to live in
the house?

                                BROVIK.

Yes. If you would only look through them and approve of them——

                                SOLNESS.

Then they would let Ragnar build their home for them?

                                BROVIK.

They were immensely pleased with his idea. They thought it exceedingly
original, they said.

                                SOLNESS.

Oho! Original! Not the old-fashioned stuff that _I_ am in the habit of
turning out!

                                BROVIK.

It seemed to them _different_.

                                SOLNESS.

[_With suppressed irritation._] So it was to see Ragnar that they came
here—whilst I was out!

                                BROVIK.

They came to call upon you—and at the same time to ask whether you would
mind retiring——

                                SOLNESS.

[_Angrily._] Retire? I?

                                BROVIK.

In case you thought that Ragnar’s drawings——

                                SOLNESS.

I! Retire in favour of your son!

                                BROVIK.

Retire from the agreement, they meant.

                                SOLNESS.

Oh, it comes to the same thing. [_Laughs angrily._] So that is it, is
it? Halvard Solness is to see about retiring now! To make room for
younger men! For the very youngest, perhaps! He must make room! Room!
Room!

                                BROVIK.

Why, good heavens! there is surely room for more than one single man——

                                SOLNESS.

Oh, there’s not so _very_ much room to spare either. But, be that as it
may—I will never retire! I will never give way to anybody! Never of my
own free will. Never in this world will I do _that_!

                                BROVIK.

[_Rises with difficulty._] Then I am to pass out of life without any
certainty? Without a gleam of happiness? Without any faith or trust in
Ragnar? Without having seen a single piece of work of his doing? Is that
to be the way of it?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Turns half aside, and mutters._] H’m—don’t ask more just now.

                                BROVIK.

I must have an answer to this one question. Am I to pass out of life in
such utter poverty?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Seems to struggle with himself; finally he says, in a low but firm
voice_:] You must pass out of life as best you can.

                                BROVIK.

Then be it so.                                  [_He goes up the room._

                                SOLNESS.

[_Following him, half in desperation._] Don’t you understand that I
_cannot_ help it? I am what I am, and I cannot change my nature!

                                BROVIK.

No, no; I suppose you can’t. [_Reels and supports himself against the
sofa-table._] May I have a glass of water?

                                SOLNESS.

By all means.                     [_Fills a glass and hands it to him._

                                BROVIK.

Thanks.                        [_Drinks and puts the glass down again._

          [SOLNESS _goes up and opens the door of the draughtsmen’s
            office._

                                SOLNESS.

Ragnar—you must come and take your father home.

     RAGNAR _rises quickly. He and_ KAIA _come into the work-room._

                                RAGNAR.

What is the matter, father?

                                BROVIK.

Give me your arm. Now let us go.

                                RAGNAR.

Very well. You had better put your things on, too, Kaia.

                                SOLNESS.

Miss Fosli must stay—just for a moment. There is a letter I want
written.

                                BROVIK.

[_Looks at SOLNESS._] Good night. Sleep well—if you can.

                                SOLNESS.

Good night.

          [BROVIK _and_ RAGNAR _go out by the hall-door._ KAIA _goes to
            the desk._ SOLNESS _stands with bent head, to the right, by
            the arm-chair._

                                 KAIA.

[_Dubiously._] _Is_ there any letter——?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Curtly._] No, of course not. [_Looks sternly at her._] Kaia!

                                 KAIA.

[_Anxiously, in a low voice._] Yes!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Points imperatively to a spot on the floor._] Come here! At once!

                                 KAIA.

[_Hesitatingly._] Yes.

                                SOLNESS.

[_As before._] Nearer!

                                 KAIA.

[_Obeying._] What do you want with me?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks at her for a while._] Is it you I have to thank for all this?

                                 KAIA.

No, no, don’t think that!

                                SOLNESS.

But confess now—you want to get married!

                                 KAIA.

[_Softly._] Ragnar and I have been engaged for four or five years, and
so——

                                SOLNESS.

And so you think it time there were an end of it. Is not that so?

                                 KAIA.

Ragnar and Uncle say I _must_. So I suppose I shall have to give in.

                                SOLNESS.

[_More gently._] Kaia, don’t you really care a little bit for Ragnar,
too?

                                 KAIA.

I cared very much for Ragnar once—before I came here to you.

                                SOLNESS.

But you don’t now? Not in the least?

                                 KAIA.

[_Passionately, clasping her hands and holding them out towards him._]
Oh, you know very well there is only one person I care for now! One, and
one only, in all the world! I shall never care for any one else.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, you say that. And yet you go away from me—leave me alone here with
everything on my hands.

                                 KAIA.

But could I not stay with you, even if Ragnar——?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Repudiating the idea._] No, no, that is quite impossible. If Ragnar
leaves me and starts work on his own account, then of course he will
need you himself.

                                 KAIA.

[_Wringing her hands._] Oh, I feel as if I _could_ not be separated from
you! It’s quite, quite impossible!

                                SOLNESS.

Then be sure you get those foolish notions out of Ragnar’s head. Marry
him as much as you please—[_Alters his tone._] I mean—don’t let him
throw up his good situation with me. For then I can keep _you_ too, my
dear KAIA.

                                 KAIA.

Oh yes, how lovely that would be, if it could only be managed!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Clasps her head with his two hands and whispers._] For I cannot get on
without you, you see. I must have you with me every single day.

                                 KAIA.

[_In nervous exaltation._] My God! My God!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Kisses her hair._] Kaia—Kaia!

                                 KAIA.

[_Sinks down before him._] Oh, how good you are to me! How unspeakably
good you are!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Vehemently._] Get up! For goodness’ sake get up! I think I hear some
one!

          [_He helps her to rise. She staggers over to the desk._

MRS. SOLNESS _enters by the door on the right. She looks thin and wasted
    with grief, but shows traces of bygone beauty. Blonde ringlets.
    Dressed with good taste, wholly in black. Speaks somewhat slowly and
    in a plaintive voice._

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_In the doorway._] Halvard!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Turns._] Oh, are you there, my dear——?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_With a glance at KAIA._] I am afraid I am disturbing you.

                                SOLNESS.

Not in the least. Miss Fosli has only a short letter to write.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes, so I see.

                                SOLNESS.

What do you want with me, Aline?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

I merely wanted to tell you that Dr. Herdal is in the drawing-room.
Won’t you come and see him, Halvard?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks suspiciously at her._] H’m—is the doctor so very anxious to talk
to me?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Well, not exactly anxious. He really came to see me; but he would like
to say how-do-you-do to you at the same time.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Laughs to himself._] Yes, I daresay. Well, you must ask him to wait a
little.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Then you will come in presently?

                                SOLNESS.

Perhaps I will. Presently, presently, dear. In a little while.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Glancing again at KAIA._] Well now, don’t forget, Halvard.

                            [_Withdraws and closes the door behind her._

                                 KAIA.

[_Softly._] Oh dear, oh dear—I am sure Mrs. Solness thinks ill of me in
some way!

                                SOLNESS.

Oh, not in the least. Not more than usual at any rate. But all the same,
you had better go now, Kaia.

                                 KAIA.

Yes, yes, now I _must_ go.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Severely._] And mind you get that matter settled for me. Do you hear?

                                 KAIA.

Oh, if it only depended on _me_——

                                SOLNESS.

I _will_ have it settled, I say! And to-morrow too—not a day later!

                                 KAIA.

[_Terrified._] If there’s nothing else for it, I am quite willing to
break off the engagement.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Angrily._] Break it off. Are you mad? Would you think of breaking it
off?

                                 KAIA.

[_Distracted._] Yes, if necessary. For I _must_—I _must_ stay here with
you! I _can’t_ leave you! That is utterly—utterly impossible!

                                SOLNESS.

[_With a sudden outburst._] But deuce take it—how about Ragnar then!
It’s Ragnar that I——

                                 KAIA.

[_Looks at him with terrified eyes._] It is chiefly on Ragnar’s account,
that—that you——?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Collecting himself._] No, no, of course not! You don’t understand me
either. [_Gently and softly._] Of course it is _you_ I want to keep—you
above everything, KAIA. But for that very reason, you must prevent
Ragnar, too, from throwing up his situation. There, there,—now go home.

                                 KAIA.

Yes, yes—good-night, then.

                                SOLNESS.

Good night. [_As she is going._] Oh, stop a moment! Are Ragnar’s
drawings in there?

                                 KAIA.

I did not see him take them with him.

                                SOLNESS.

Then just go and find them for me. I might perhaps glance over them,
after all.

                                 KAIA.

[_Happy._] Oh yes, please do!

                                SOLNESS.

For your sake, Kaia dear. Now, let me have them at once, please.

          [KAIA _hurries into the draughtsmen’s office, searches
            anxiously in the table-drawer finds a portfolio and brings
            it with her._

                                 KAIA.

Here are all the drawings.

                                SOLNESS.

Good. Put them down there on the table.

                                 KAIA.

[_Putting down the portfolio._] Good night, then. [_Beseechingly._] And
please, please think kindly of me.

                                SOLNESS.

Oh, that I always do. Good-night, my dear little Kaia. [_Glances to the
right._] Go, go now!

MRS. SOLNESS _and_ DR. HERDAL _enter by the door on the right. He is a
    stoutish, elderly man, with a round, good-humoured face, clean
    shaven, with thin, light hair, and gold spectacles._

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Still in the doorway._] Halvard, I cannot keep the doctor any longer.

                                SOLNESS.

Well then, come in here.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_To KAIA, who is turning down the desk-lamp._] Have you finished the
letter already, Miss Fosli?

                                 KAIA.

[_In confusion._] The letter——?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, it was quite a short one.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

It must have been very short.

                                SOLNESS.

You may go now, Miss Fosli. And please come in good time to-morrow
morning.

                                 KAIA.

I will be sure to. Good-night, Mrs. Solness.

                                       [_She goes out by the hall door._

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

She must be quite an acquisition to you, Halvard, this Miss Fosli.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, indeed. She is useful in all sorts of ways.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

So it seems.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Is she good at book-keeping too?

                                SOLNESS.

Well—of course she has had a good deal of practice during these two
years. And then she is so nice and willing to do whatever one asks of
her.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes, that must be very delightful——

                                SOLNESS.

It is. Especially when one is not too much accustomed to that sort of
thing.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_In a tone of gentle remonstrance._] Can _you_ say that, Halvard?

                                SOLNESS.

Oh, no, no, my dear Aline; I beg your pardon.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

There’s no occasion.—Well then, doctor, you will come back later on, and
have a cup of tea with us?

                              DR. HERDAL.

I have only that one patient to see, and then I’ll come back.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Thank you.

                               [_She goes out by the door on the right._

                                SOLNESS.

Are you in a hurry, doctor?

                              DR. HERDAL.

No, not at all.

                                SOLNESS.

May I have a little chat with you?

                              DR. HERDAL.

With the greatest of pleasure.

                                SOLNESS.

Then let us sit down. [_He motions the doctor to take the rocking-chair,
and sits down himself in the arm-chair. Looks searchingly at him._] Tell
me—did you notice anything odd about Aline?

                              DR. HERDAL.

Do you mean just now, when she was here?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, in her manner to me. Did you notice anything?

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_Smiling._] Well, I admit—one couldn’t well avoid noticing that your
wife—h’m——

                                SOLNESS.

Well?

                              DR. HERDAL.

—that your wife is not particularly fond of this Miss Fosli.

                                SOLNESS.

Is that all? I have noticed that myself.

                              DR. HERDAL.

And I must say I am scarcely surprised at it.

                                SOLNESS.

At what?

                              DR. HERDAL.

That she should not exactly approve of your seeing so much of another
woman, all day and every day.

                                SOLNESS.

No, no, I suppose you are right there—and Aline too. But it’s impossible
to make any change.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Could you not engage a clerk?

                                SOLNESS.

The first man that came to hand? No, thank you—that would never do for
me.

                              DR. HERDAL.

But now, if your wife——? Suppose, with her delicate health, all this
tries her too much?

                                SOLNESS.

Even then—I might almost say—it can make no difference. I _must_ keep
Kaia Fosli. No one else could fill her place.

                              DR. HERDAL.

No one else?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Curtly._] No, no one.

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_Drawing his chair closer._] Now listen to me my dear Mr. SOLNESS. May
I ask you a question, quite between ourselves?

                                SOLNESS.

By all means.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Women, you see—in certain matters, they have a deucedly keen intuition——

                                SOLNESS.

They have, indeed. There is not the least doubt of that. But——?

                              DR. HERDAL.

Well, tell me now—if your wife can’t endure this Kaia Fosli——?

                                SOLNESS.

Well, what then?

                              DR. HERDAL.

—may she not have just—just the least little bit of reason for this
instinctive dislike?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks at him and rises._] Oho!

                              DR. HERDAL.

Now don’t be offended—but _hasn’t_ she?

                                SOLNESS.

[_With curt decision._] No.

                              DR. HERDAL.

No reason of any sort?

                                SOLNESS.

No other reason than her own suspicious nature.

                              DR. HERDAL.

I know you have known a good many women in your time.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, I have.

                              DR. HERDAL.

And have been a good deal taken with some of them, too.

                                SOLNESS.

Oh yes, I don’t deny it.

                              DR. HERDAL.

But as regards Miss Fosli, then? There is nothing of that sort in the
case?

                                SOLNESS.

No; nothing at all—on _my_ side.

                              DR. HERDAL.

But on her side?

                                SOLNESS.

I don’t think you have any right to ask that question, doctor.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Well, you know, we were discussing your wife’s intuition.

                                SOLNESS.

So we were. And for that matter—[_lowers his voice_]—Aline’s intuition,
as you call it—in a certain sense, it has not been so far astray.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Aha! there we have it!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Sits down._] Doctor Herdal—I am going to tell you a strange story—if
you care to listen to it.

                              DR. HERDAL.

I like listening to strange stories.

                                SOLNESS.

Very well then. I daresay you recollect that I took Knut Brovik and his
son into my employment—after the old man’s business had gone to the
dogs.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Yes, so I have understood.

                                SOLNESS.

You see, they really are clever fellows, these two. Each of them has
talent in his own way. But then the son took it into his head to get
engaged; and the next thing, of course, was that he wanted to get
married—and begin to build on his own account. That is the way with all
these young people.

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_Laughing._] Yes, they have a bad habit of wanting to marry.

                                SOLNESS.

Just so. But of course that did not suit _my_ plans; for I needed Ragnar
myself—and the old man too. He is exceedingly good at calculating
bearing-strains and cubic contents—and all that sort of devilry, you
know.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Oh yes, no doubt that’s indispensable.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, it is. But Ragnar was absolutely bent on setting to work for
himself. He would hear of nothing else.

                              DR. HERDAL.

But he has stayed with you all the same.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, I’ll tell you how that came about. One day this girl, Kaia Fosli,
came to see them on some errand or other. She had never been here
before. And when I saw how utterly infatuated they were with each other,
the thought occurred to me: if I could only get her into the office
here, then perhaps Ragnar too would stay where he is.

                              DR. HERDAL.

That was not at all a bad idea.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, but at the time I did not breathe a word of what was in my mind. I
merely stood and looked at her—and kept on wishing intently that I could
have her here. Then I talked to her a little, in a friendly way—about
one thing and another. And then she went away.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Well?

                                SOLNESS.

Well then, next day, pretty late in the evening, when old Brovik and
Ragnar had gone home, she came here again, and behaved as if I had made
an arrangement with her.

                              DR. HERDAL.

An arrangement? What about?

                                SOLNESS.

About the very thing my mind had been fixed on. But I hadn’t said one
single word about it.

                              DR. HERDAL.

That was most extraordinary.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, was it not? And now she wanted to know what she was to do
here—whether she could begin the very next morning, and so forth.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Don’t you think she did it in order to be with her sweetheart?

                                SOLNESS.

That was what occurred to me at first. But no, that was not it. She
seemed to drift quite away from _him_—when once she had come here to me.

                              DR. HERDAL.

She drifted over to you, then?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, entirely. If I happen to look at her when her back is turned, I can
tell that she feels it. She quivers and trembles the moment I come near
her. What do you think of _that_?

                              DR. HERDAL.

H’m—that’s not very hard to explain.

                                SOLNESS.

Well, but what about the other thing? That she believed I had said to
her what I had only wished and willed—silently—inwardly—to myself? What
do you say to _that_? Can you explain that, Dr. Herdal?

                              DR. HERDAL.

No, I won’t undertake to do that.

                                SOLNESS.

I felt sure you would not; and so I have never cared to talk about it
till now.—But it’s a cursed nuisance to me in the long run, you
understand. Here have I got to go on day after day pretending——. And
it’s a shame to treat her so, too, poor girl. [_Vehemently._] But I
_cannot_ do anything else. For if _she_ runs away from me—then Ragnar
will be off too.

                              DR. HERDAL.

And you have not told your wife the rights of the story?

                                SOLNESS.

No.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Then why on earth don’t you?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks fixedly at him, and says in a low voice_:] Because I seem to
find a sort of—of salutary self-torture in allowing Aline to do me an
injustice.

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_Shakes his head._] I don’t in the least understand what you mean.

                                SOLNESS.

Well, you see—it is like paying off a little bit of a huge, immeasurable
debt——

                              DR. HERDAL.

To your wife?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes; and that always helps to relieve one’s mind a little. One can
breathe more freely for a while, you understand.

                              DR. HERDAL.

No, goodness knows, I don’t understand at all——

                                SOLNESS.

[_Breaking off, rises again._] Well, well, well—then we won’t talk any
more about it. [_He saunters across the room, returns, and stops beside
the table. Looks at the doctor with a sly smile._] I suppose you think
you have drawn me out nicely now, doctor?

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_With some irritation._] Drawn you out? Again I have not the faintest
notion what you mean, Mr. Solness.

                                SOLNESS.

Oh come, out with it; I have seen it quite clearly, you know.

                              DR. HERDAL.

_What_ have you seen?

                                SOLNESS.

[_In a low voice, slowly._] That you have been quietly keeping an eye
upon me.

                              DR. HERDAL.

That _I_ have! And why in all the world should I do _that_?

                                SOLNESS.

Because you think that I——[_Passionately._] Well, devil take it—you
think the same of me as Aline does.

                              DR. HERDAL.

And what does _she_ think about you?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Having recovered his self-control._] She has begun to think that I
am—that I am—ill.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Ill! _You_! She has never hinted such a thing to me. Why, what can she
think is the matter with you?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Leans over the back of the chair and whispers._] Aline has made up her
mind that I am mad. _That_ is what she thinks.

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_Rising._] Why, my dear good fellow——!

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, on my soul she does! I tell you it is so. And she has got you to
think the same! Oh, I can assure you, doctor, I see it in your face as
clearly as possible. You don’t take me in so easily, I can tell you.

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_Looks at him in amazement._] Never, Mr. Solness—never has such a
thought entered my mind.

                                SOLNESS.

[_With an incredulous smile._] Really? Has it not?

                              DR. HERDAL.

No, never! Nor your wife’s mind either, I am convinced. I could almost
swear to that.

                                SOLNESS.

Well, I wouldn’t advise you to. For, in a certain sense, you see,
perhaps—perhaps she is not so far wrong in thinking something of the
kind.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Come now, I really must say——

                                SOLNESS.

[_Interrupting, with a sweep of his hand._] Well, well, my dear
doctor—don’t let us discuss this any further. We had better agree to
differ. [_Changes to a tone of quiet amusement._] But look here now,
doctor—h’m——

                              DR. HERDAL.

Well?

                                SOLNESS.

Since you don’t believe that I am—ill—and crazy—and mad, and so forth——

                              DR. HERDAL.

What then?

                                SOLNESS.

Then I daresay you fancy that I am an extremely happy man.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Is _that_ mere fancy?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Laughs._] No, no—of course not! Heaven forbid! Only think—to be
Solness the master builder! Halvard Solness! What could be more
delightful?

                              DR. HERDAL.

Yes, I must say it seems to me you have had the luck on your side to an
astounding degree.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Suppresses a gloomy smile._] So I have. I can’t complain on _that_
score.

                              DR. HERDAL.

First of all that grim old robbers’ castle was burnt down for you. And
_that_ was certainly a great piece of luck.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Seriously._] It was the home of Aline’s family. Remember that.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Yes, it must have been a great grief to _her_.

                                SOLNESS.

She has not got over it to this day—not in all these twelve or thirteen
years.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Ah, but what followed must have been the worst blow for her.

                                SOLNESS.

The one thing with the other.

                              DR. HERDAL.

But you—yourself—_you_ rose upon the ruins. You began as a poor boy from
a country village—and now you are at the head of your profession. Ah,
yes, Mr. Solness, you have undoubtedly had the luck on your side.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looking at him with embarrassment._] Yes, but that is just what makes
me so horribly afraid.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Afraid? Because you have the luck on your side!

                                SOLNESS.

It terrifies me—terrifies me every hour of the day. For sooner or later
the luck must turn, you see.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Oh nonsense! What should make the luck turn?

                                SOLNESS.

[_With firm assurance._] The younger generation.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Pooh! The younger generation! You are not laid on the shelf yet, I
should hope. Oh no—your position here is probably firmer now than it has
ever been.

                                SOLNESS.

The luck _will_ turn. I know it—I feel the day approaching. Some one or
other will take it into his head to say: Give _me_ a chance! And then
all the rest will come clamouring after him, and shake their fists at me
and shout: Make room—make room—make room! Yes, just you see,
doctor—presently the younger generation will come knocking at my door——

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_Laughing._] Well, and what if they do?

                                SOLNESS.

What if they do? Then there’s an end of Halvard Solness.

                            [_There is a knock at the door on the left._

                                SOLNESS.

[_Starts._] What’s that? Did you not hear something?

                              DR. HERDAL.

Some one is knocking at the door.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Loudly._] Come in.

HILDA WANGEL _enters by the hall door. She is of middle height, supple,
    and delicately built. Somewhat sunburnt. Dressed in a tourist
    costume, with skirt caught up for walking, a sailor’s collar open at
    the throat, and a small sailor hat on her head. Knapsack on back,
    plaid in strap, and alpenstock._

                                 HILDA.

[_Goes straight up to SOLNESS, her eyes sparkling with happiness._] Good
evening!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks doubtfully at her._] Good evening——

                                 HILDA.

[_Laughs._] I almost believe you don’t recognise me!

                                SOLNESS.

No—I must admit that—just for the moment——

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_Approaching._] But _I_ recognise you, my dear young lady——

                                 HILDA.

[_Pleased._] Oh, is it you that——

                              DR. HERDAL.

Of course it is. [_To SOLNESS._] We met at one of the mountain stations
this summer. [_To HILDA._] What became of the other ladies?

                                 HILDA.

Oh, _they_ went westward.

                              DR. HERDAL.

They didn’t much like all the fun we used to have in the evenings.

                                 HILDA.

No, I believe they didn’t.

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_Holds up his finger at her._] And I am afraid it can’t be denied that
you flirted a little with us.

                                 HILDA.

Well, that was better fun than to sit there knitting stockings with all
those old women.

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_Laughs._] There I entirely agree with you!

                                SOLNESS.

Have you come to town this evening?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, I have just arrived.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Quite alone, Miss Wangel?

                                 HILDA.

Oh yes!

                                SOLNESS.

Wangel? Is your name Wangel?

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks in amused surprise at him._] Yes, of course it is.

                                SOLNESS.

Then you must be a daughter of the district doctor up at Lysanger?

                                 HILDA.

[_As before._] Yes, who else’s daughter should I be?

                                SOLNESS.

Oh, then I suppose we met up there, that summer when I was building a
tower on the old church.

                                 HILDA.

[_More seriously._] Yes, of course it was then we met.

                                SOLNESS.

Well, that is a long time ago.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks hard at him._] It is exactly the ten years.

                                SOLNESS.

You must have been a mere child then, I should think.

                                 HILDA.

[_Carelessly._] Well, I was twelve or thirteen.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Is this the first time you have ever been up to town, Miss Wangel?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, it is indeed.

                                SOLNESS.

And don’t you know any one here?

                                 HILDA.

Nobody but you. And of course, your wife.

                                SOLNESS.

So you know _her_, too?

                                 HILDA.

Only a little. We spent a few days together at the sanatorium.

                                SOLNESS.

Ah, up there?

                                 HILDA.

She said I might come and pay her a visit if ever I came up to town.
[_Smiles._] Not that that was necessary.

                                SOLNESS.

Odd that she should never have mentioned it.

          [HILDA _puts her stick down by the stove, takes off the
            knapsack and lays it and the plaid on the sofa._ DR. HERDAL
            _offers to help her. SOLNESS stands and gazes at her._

                                 HILDA.

[_Going towards him._] Well, now I must ask you to let me stay the night
here.

                                SOLNESS.

I am sure there will be no difficulty about that.

                                 HILDA.

For I have no other clothes than those I stand in, except a change of
linen in my knapsack. And that has to go to the wash, for it’s very
dirty.

                                SOLNESS.

Oh yes, that can be managed. Now I’ll just let my wife know——

                              DR. HERDAL.

Meanwhile I will go and see my patient.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, do; and come again later on.

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_Playfully, with a glance at HILDA._] Oh that I will, you may be very
certain! [_Laughs._] So your prediction has come true, Mr. Solness!

                                SOLNESS.

How so?

                              DR. HERDAL.

The younger generation _did_ come knocking at your door.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Cheerfully._] Yes, but in a very different way from what I meant.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Very different, yes. That’s undeniable.

          [_He goes out by the hall-door._ SOLNESS _opens the door on
            the right and speaks into the side room._

                                SOLNESS.

Aline! Will you come in here, please. Here is a friend of yours—Miss
Wangel.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Appears in the doorway._] Who do you say it is? [_Sees HILDA._] Oh, is
it you, Miss Wangel? [_Goes up to her and offers her hand._] So you have
come to town after all.

                                SOLNESS.

Miss Wangel has this moment arrived; and she would like to stay the
night here.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Here with us? Oh yes, certainly.

                                SOLNESS.

Till she can get her things a little in order, you know.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

I will do the best I can for you. It’s no more than my duty. I suppose
your trunk is coming on later?

                                 HILDA.

I _have_ no trunk.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Well, it will be all right, I daresay. In the meantime, you must excuse
my leaving you here with my husband, until I can get a room made a
little comfortable for you.

                                SOLNESS.

Can we not give her one of the nurseries? _They_ are all ready as it is.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh yes. There we have room and to spare. [_To HILDA._] Sit down now, and
rest a little.

rj [_She goes out to the right._

          [HILDA, _with her hands behind her back, strolls about the
            room and looks at various objects._ SOLNESS _stands in
            front, beside the table, also with his hands behind his
            back, and follows her with his eyes._

                                 HILDA.

[_Stops and looks at him._] Have you several nurseries?

                                SOLNESS.

There are three nurseries in the house.

                                 HILDA.

That’s a lot. Then I suppose you have a great many children?

                                SOLNESS.

No. We have no child. But now _you_ can be the child here, for the time
being.

                                 HILDA.

For to-night, yes. I shall not cry. I mean to sleep as sound as a stone.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, you must be very tired, I should think.

                                 HILDA.

Oh no! But all the same—— It’s so delicious to lie and dream.

                                SOLNESS.

Do you dream much of nights?

                                 HILDA.

Oh yes! Almost always.

                                SOLNESS.

What do you dream about most?

                                 HILDA.

I sha’n’t tell you to-night. Another time—perhaps.

          [_She again strolls about the room, stops at the desk and
            turns over the books and papers a little._

                                SOLNESS.

[_Approaching._] Are you searching for anything?

                                 HILDA.

No, I am merely looking at all these things. [_Turns._] Perhaps I
mustn’t?

                                SOLNESS.

Oh, by all means.

                                 HILDA.

Is it _you_ that write in this great ledger?

                                SOLNESS.

No, it’s my book-keeper.

                                 HILDA.

Is it a woman?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Smiles._] Yes.

                                 HILDA.

One you employ here, in your office?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes.

                                 HILDA.

Is she married?

                                SOLNESS.

No, she is single.

                                 HILDA.

Oh, indeed!

                                SOLNESS.

But I believe she is soon going to be married.

                                 HILDA.

That’s a good thing for _her_.

                                SOLNESS.

But not such a good thing for _me_. For then I shall have nobody to help
me.

                                 HILDA.

Can’t you get hold of some one else who will do just as well?

                                SOLNESS.

Perhaps _you_ would stay here and—and write in the ledger?

                                 HILDA.

[_Measures him with a glance._] Yes, I daresay! No, thank you—nothing of
that sort for me.

          [_She again strolls across the room, and sits down in the
            rocking-chair._ SOLNESS _too goes to the table._

                                 HILDA.

[_Continuing._] For there must surely be plenty of other things to be
done here. [_Looks smilingly at him._] Don’t you think so, too?

                                SOLNESS.

Of course. First of all, I suppose, you want to make a round of the
shops, and get yourself up in the height of fashion.

                                 HILDA.

[_Amused._] No, I think I shall let _that_ alone!

                                SOLNESS.

Indeed?

                                 HILDA.

For you must know I have run through all my money.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Laughs._] Neither trunk nor money, then!

                                 HILDA.

Neither one nor the other. But never mind—it doesn’t matter now.

                                SOLNESS.

Come now, I like you for _that_.

                                 HILDA.

Only for _that_?

                                SOLNESS.

For that among other things. [_Sits in the armchair._] Is your father
alive still?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, father’s alive.

                                SOLNESS.

Perhaps you are thinking of studying here?

                                 HILDA.

No, that hadn’t occurred to me.

                                SOLNESS.

But I suppose you will be staying for some time?

                                 HILDA.

That must depend upon circumstances.

          [_She sits awhile rocking herself and looking at him, half
            seriously, half with a suppressed smile. Then she takes off
            her hat and puts it on the table in front of her._

                                 HILDA.

Mr. Solness!

                                SOLNESS.

Well?

                                 HILDA.

Have you a very bad memory?

                                SOLNESS.

A bad memory? No, not that I am aware of.

                                 HILDA.

Then have you nothing to say to me about what happened up there?

                                SOLNESS.

[_In momentary surprise._] Up at Lysanger? [_Indifferently._] Why, it
was nothing much to talk about, it seems to me.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks reproachfully at him._] How can you sit there and say such
things?

                                SOLNESS.

Well, then, _you_ talk to me about it.

                                 HILDA.

When the tower was finished, we had grand doings in the town.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, I shall not easily forget that day.

                                 HILDA.

[_Smiles._] Will you not? That comes well from _you_.

                                SOLNESS.

Comes well?

                                 HILDA.

There was music in the churchyard—and many, many hundreds of people. We
school-girls were dressed in white; and we all carried flags.

                                SOLNESS.

All yes, those flags—I can tell you I remember _them_!

                                 HILDA.

Then you climbed right up the scaffolding, straight to the very top; and
you had a great wreath with you; and you hung that wreath right away up
on the weather-vane.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Curtly interrupting._] I always did that in those days. It is an old
custom.

                                 HILDA.

It was so wonderfully thrilling to stand below and look up at you.
Fancy, if he should fall over! He—the master builder himself!

                                SOLNESS.

[_As if to divert her from the subject._] Yes, yes, yes, that might very
well have happened, too. For one of those white-frocked little
devils,—she went on in such a way, and screamed up at me so——

                                 HILDA.

[_Sparkling with pleasure._] “Hurra for Master Builder Solness!” Yes!

                                SOLNESS.

—and waved and flourished with her flag, so that I—so that it almost
made me giddy to look at it.

                                 HILDA.

[_In a lower voice, seriously._] That little devil—that was _I_.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Fixes his eyes steadily upon her._] I am sure of that now. It _must_
have been you.

                                 HILDA.

[_Lively again._] Oh, it was so gloriously thrilling! I could not have
believed there was a builder in the whole world that could build such a
tremendously high tower. And then, that you yourself should stand at the
very top of it, as large as life! And that you should not be the least
bit dizzy! It was _that_ above everything that made one—made one dizzy
to think of.

                                SOLNESS.

How could you be so certain that I was not——?

                                 HILDA.

[_Scouting the idea._] No indeed! Oh no! I knew that instinctively. For
if you had been, you could never have stood up there and sung.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks at her in astonishment.]_] Sung? Did _I_ sing?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, I should think you did.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Shakes his head._] I have never sung a note in my life.

                                 HILDA.

Yes indeed, you sang then. It sounded like harps in the air.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Thoughtfully._] This is very strange—all this.

                                 HILDA.

[_Is silent awhile, looks at him and says in a low voice_:] But then,—it
was after that—that the _real_ thing happened.

                                SOLNESS.

The real thing?

                                 HILDA.

[_Sparkling with vivacity._] Yes, I surely don’t need to remind you of
_that_?

                                SOLNESS.

Oh yes, do remind me a little of _that_, too.

                                 HILDA.

Don’t you remember that a great dinner was given in your honour at the
Club?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, to be sure. It must have been the same afternoon, for I left the
place next morning.

                                 HILDA.

And from the Club you were invited to come round to our house to supper.

                                SOLNESS.

Quite right, Miss Wangel. It is wonderful how all these trifles have
impressed themselves on your mind.

                                 HILDA.

Trifles! I like that! Perhaps it was a trifle, too, that I was _alone_
in the room when you came in?

                                SOLNESS.

_Were_ you alone?

                                 HILDA.

[_Without answering him._] You didn’t call me a little devil _then_?

                                SOLNESS.

No, I suppose I did not.

                                 HILDA.

You said I was lovely in my white dress, and that I looked like a little
princess.

                                SOLNESS.

I have no doubt you did, Miss Wangel.—And besides—I was feeling so
buoyant and free that day——

                                 HILDA.

And then you said that when I grew up I should be _your_ princess.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Laughing a little._] Dear, dear—did I say _that_ too?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, you did. And when I asked how long I should have to wait, you said
that you would come again in ten years—like a troll—and carry me off—to
Spain or some such place. And you promised you would buy me a kingdom
there.

                                SOLNESS.

[_As before._] Yes, after a good dinner one doesn’t haggle about the
halfpence. But did I really _say_ all that?

                                 HILDA.

[_Laughs to herself._] Yes. And you told me, too, what the kingdom was
to be called.

                                SOLNESS.

Well, what was it?

                                 HILDA.

It was to be called the kingdom of Orangia,[26] you said.

                                SOLNESS.

Well, that was an appetising name.

                                 HILDA.

No, I didn’t like it a bit; for it seemed as though you wanted to make
game of me.

                                SOLNESS.

I am sure _that_ cannot have been my intention.

                                 HILDA.

No, I should hope not—considering what you did next——

                                SOLNESS.

What in the world did I do next?

                                 HILDA.

Well, that’s the finishing touch, if you have forgotten _that_ too. I
should have thought no one could help remembering such a thing as that.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, yes, just give me a hint, and then perhaps——Well?

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks fixedly at him._] You came and kissed me, Mr. SOLNESS.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Open-mouthed, rising from his chair._] _I_ did!

                                 HILDA.

Yes, indeed you did. You took me in both your arms, and bent my head
back, and kissed me—many times.

                                SOLNESS.

Now really, my dear Miss Wangel——!

                                 HILDA.

[_Rises._] You surely cannot mean to deny it?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, I do. I deny it altogether!

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks scornfully at him._] Oh, indeed!

          [_She turns and goes slowly close up to the stove, where she
            remains standing motionless, her face averted from him, her
            hands behind her back. Short pause._

                                SOLNESS.

[_Goes cautiously up behind her._] Miss Wangel——!

                                 HILDA.

[_Is silent and does not move._]

                                SOLNESS.

Don’t stand there like a statue. You must have dreamt all this. [_Lays
his hand on her arm._] Now just listen——

                                 HILDA.

[_Makes an impatient movement with her arm._]

                                SOLNESS.

[_As a thought flashes upon him._] Or——! Wait a moment! There is
something under all this, you may depend!

                                 HILDA.

[_Does not move._]

                                SOLNESS.

[_In a low voice, but with emphasis._] I must have _thought_ all that. I
must have _wished_ it—have _willed_ it—have _longed_ to do it. And
then——. May not that be the explanation?

                                 HILDA.

[_Is still silent._]

                                SOLNESS.

[_Impatiently._] Oh very well, deuce take it all—then I _did_ do it, I
suppose.

                                 HILDA.

[_Turns her head a little, but without looking at him._] Then you admit
it now?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes—whatever you like.

                                 HILDA.

You came and put your arms round me?

                                SOLNESS.

Oh yes!

                                 HILDA.

And bent my head back?

                                SOLNESS.

Very far back.

                                 HILDA.

And kissed me?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, I did

                                 HILDA.

Many times?

                                SOLNESS.

As many as ever you like.

                                 HILDA.

[_Turns quickly towards him and has once more the sparkling expression
of gladness in her eyes._] Well, you see, I got it out of you at last!

                                SOLNESS.

[_With a slight smile._] Yes—just think of my forgetting such a thing as
that.

                                 HILDA.

[_Again a little sulky, retreats from him._] Oh, you have kissed so many
people in your time, I suppose.

                                SOLNESS.

No, you mustn’t think _that_ of me. [_HILDA seats herself in the
arm-chair. SOLNESS stands and leans against the rocking-chair. Looks
observantly at her._] Miss Wangel!

                                 HILDA.

Yes!

                                SOLNESS.

How _was_ it now? What came of all this—between us two?

                                 HILDA.

Why, nothing more came of it. You know that quite well. For then the
other guests came in, and then—bah!

                                SOLNESS.

Quite so! The others came in. To think of my forgetting _that_ too!

                                 HILDA.

Oh, you haven’t really forgotten anything: you are only a little ashamed
of it all. I am sure one doesn’t forget things of that kind.

                                SOLNESS.

No, one would suppose not.

                                 HILDA.

[_Lively again, looks at him._] Perhaps you have even forgotten what day
it was?

                                SOLNESS.

What day——?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, on what day did you hang the wreath on the tower? Well? Tell me at
once!

                                SOLNESS.

H’m—I confess I have forgotten the particular day. I only know it was
ten years ago. Some time in the autumn.

                                 HILDA.

[_Nods her head slowly several times._] It was ten years ago—on the 19th
of September.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, it must have been about that time. Fancy your remembering that too!
[_Stops._] But wait a moment——! Yes—it’s the 19th of September to-day.

                                 HILDA.

Yes, it is; and the ten years are gone. And you didn’t come—as you had
promised me.

                                SOLNESS.

Promised you? Threatened, I suppose you mean?

                                 HILDA.

I don’t think there was any sort of threat in _that_.

                                SOLNESS.

Well then, a little bit of fun.

                                 HILDA.

Was _that_ all you wanted? To make fun of me?

                                SOLNESS.

Well, or to have a little joke with you! Upon my soul, I don’t
recollect. But it must have been something of that kind; for you were a
mere child then.

                                 HILDA.

Oh, perhaps I wasn’t quite such a child either. Not such a mere chit as
you imagine.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks searchingly at her._] Did you really and seriously expect me to
come again?

                                 HILDA.

[_Conceals a half-teasing smile._] Yes, indeed! I did expect _that_ of
you.

                                SOLNESS.

That I should come back to your home, and take you away with me?

                                 HILDA.

Just like a troll—yes.

                                SOLNESS.

And make a princess of you?

                                 HILDA.

That’s what you promised.

                                SOLNESS.

And give you a kingdom as well?

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks up at the ceiling._] Why not? Of course it need not have been an
actual, every-day sort of a kingdom.

                                SOLNESS.

But something else just as good?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, at least as good. [_Looks at him a moment._] I thought, if you
could build the highest church-towers in the world, you could surely
manage to raise a kingdom of one sort or another as well.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Shakes his head._] I can’t quite make you out, Miss Wangel.

                                 HILDA.

Can you not? To me it seems all so simple.

                                SOLNESS.

No, I can’t make up my mind whether you mean all you say, or are simply
having a joke with me.

                                 HILDA.

[_Smiles._] Making fun of you, perhaps? I, too?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, exactly. Making fun—of both of us. [_Looks at her._] Is it long
since you found out that I was married?

                                 HILDA.

I have known it all along. Why do you ask me _that_?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Lightly._] Oh, well, it just occurred to me. [_Looks earnestly at her,
and says in a low voice._] What have you come for?

                                 HILDA.

I want my kingdom. The time is up.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Laughs involuntarily._] What a girl you are!

                                 HILDA.

[_Gaily._] Out with my kingdom, Mr. Solness! [_Raps with her fingers._]
The kingdom on the table!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Pushing the rocking-chair nearer and sitting down._] Now, seriously
speaking—what have you come for? What do you really want to do here?

                                 HILDA.

Oh, first of all, I want to go round and look at all the things that you
have built.

                                SOLNESS.

That will give you plenty of exercise.

                                 HILDA.

Yes, I know you have built a tremendous lot.

                                SOLNESS.

I have indeed—especially of late years.

                                 HILDA.

Many church-towers among the rest? Immensely high ones?

                                SOLNESS.

No. I build no more church-towers now. Nor churches either.

                                 HILDA.

What _do_ you build then?

                                SOLNESS.

Homes for human beings.

                                 HILDA.

[_Reflectively._] Couldn’t you build a little—a little bit of a
church-tower over these homes as well?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Starting._] What do you mean by _that_?

                                 HILDA.

I mean—something that points—points up into the free air. With the vane
at a dizzy height.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Pondering a little._] Strange that you should say _that_—for that is
just what I am most anxious to do.

                                 HILDA.

[_Impatiently._] Why don’t you do it, then?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Shakes his head._] No, the people will not have it.

                                 HILDA.

Fancy their not wanting it!

                                SOLNESS.

[_More lightly._] But now I am building a new home for myself—just
opposite here.

                                 HILDA.

For yourself?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes. It is almost finished. And on that there is a tower.

                                 HILDA.

A high tower?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes.

                                 HILDA.

Very high?

                                SOLNESS.

No doubt people will say it is _too_ high—too high for a dwelling-house.

                                 HILDA.

I’ll go out and look at that tower the first thing to-morrow morning.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Sits resting his check on his hand, and gazes at her._] Tell me, Miss
Wangel—what is your name? Your Christian name, I mean?

                                 HILDA.

Why, Hilda, of course.

                                SOLNESS.

[_As before._] Hilda? Indeed?

                                 HILDA.

Don’t you remember _that_? You called me Hilda yourself—that day when
you misbehaved.

                                SOLNESS.

Did I really?

                                 HILDA.

But then you said “_little_ Hilda”; and I didn’t like that.

                                SOLNESS.

Oh, you didn’t like that, Miss Hilda?

                                 HILDA.

No, not at such a time as that. But—“Princess Hilda”—that will sound
very well, I think.

                                SOLNESS.

Very well indeed. Princess Hilda of—of—what was to be the name of the
kingdom?

                                 HILDA.

Pooh! I won’t have anything to do with _that_ stupid kingdom. I have set
my heart upon quite a different one!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Has leaned back in the chair, still gazing at her._] Isn’t it
strange——? The more I think of it now, the more it seems to me as though
I had gone about all these years torturing myself with—h’m——

                                 HILDA.

With what?

                                SOLNESS.

With the effort to recover something—some experience, which I seemed to
have forgotten. But I never had the least inkling of what it could be.

                                 HILDA.

You should have tied a knot in your pocket-handkerchief, Mr. Solness.

                                SOLNESS.

In that case, I should simply have had to go racking my brains to
discover what the knot could mean.

                                 HILDA.

Oh yes, I suppose there are trolls of _that_ kind in the world, too.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Rises slowly._] What a good thing it is that _you_ have come to me
now.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks deeply into his eyes._] _Is_ it a good thing!

                                SOLNESS.

For I have been so lonely here. I have been gazing so helplessly at it
all. [_In a lower voice._] I must tell you—I have begun to be so
afraid—so terribly afraid of the younger generation.

                                 HILDA.

[_With a little snort of contempt._] Pooh—is the younger generation a
thing to be afraid of?

                                SOLNESS.

It is indeed. And that is why I have locked and barred myself in.
[_Mysteriously_] I tell you the younger generation will one day come and
thunder at my door! They will break in upon me!

                                 HILDA.

Then I should say you ought to go out and open the door to the younger
generation.

                                SOLNESS.

Open the door?

                                 HILDA.

Yes. Let them come in to you on friendly terms, as it were.

                                SOLNESS.

No, no, no! The younger generation—it means retribution, you see. It
comes, as if under a new banner, heralding the turn of fortune.

                                 HILDA.

[_Rises, looks at him, and says with a quivering twitch of her lips._]
Can _I_ be of any use to you, Mr. Solness?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, you can indeed! For you, too, come—under a new banner, it seems to
me. Youth marshalled against youth——!

                _DR. HERDAL comes in by the hall-door._

                              DR. HERDAL.

What—you and Miss Wangel here still?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes. We have had no end of things to talk about.

                                 HILDA.

Both old and new.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Have you really?

                                 HILDA.

Oh, it has been the greatest fun. For Mr. Solness—he has such a
miraculous memory. All the least little details he remembers instantly.

            _MRS. SOLNESS enters by the door on the right._

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Well, Miss Wangel, your room is quite ready for you now.

                                 HILDA.

Oh, how kind you are to me!

                                SOLNESS.

[_To MRS. SOLNESS._] The nursery?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes, the middle one. But first let us go in to supper.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Nods to HILDA._] Hilda shall sleep in the nursery, she shall.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Looks at him._] Hilda?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, Miss Wangel’s name is Hilda. I knew her when she was a child.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Did you really, Halvard? Well, shall we go? Supper is on the table.

          [_She takes_ DR. HERDAL’S _arm and goes out with him to the
            right._ HILDA _has meanwhile been collecting her travelling
            things._

                                 HILDA.

[_Softly and rapidly to SOLNESS._] Is it true, what you said? _Can_ I be
of use to you?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Takes the things from her._] _You_ are the very being I have needed
most.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks at him with happy, wondering eyes and clasps her hands._] But
then, great heavens——!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Eagerly._] What——?

                                 HILDA.

Then I _have_ my kingdom!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Involuntarily._] Hilda——!

                                 HILDA.

[_Again with the quivering twitch of her lips._] _Almost_—I was going to
say.

          [_She goes out to the right,_ SOLNESS _follows her._

-----

Footnote 26:

  In the original “Appelsinia,” “appelsin” meaning “orange.”




                              ACT SECOND.

_A prettily furnished small drawing-room in_ SOLNESS’S _house. In the
      back, a glass-door leading out to the verandah and garden. The
      right-hand corner is cut off transversely by a large bay-window,
      in which are flower-stands. The left-hand corner is similarly cut
      off by a transverse wall, in which is a small door papered like
      the wall. On each side, an ordinary door. In front, on the right,
      a console table with a large mirror over it. Well-filled stands of
      plants and flowers. In front, on the left, a sofa with a table and
      chairs. Further back, a bookcase. Well forward in the room, before
      the bay window, a small table and some chairs. It is early in the
      day._

SOLNESS _sits by the little table with_ RAGNAR BROVIK’S _portfolio open
      in front of him. He is turning the drawings over and closely
      examining some of them._ MRS. SOLNESS _moves about noiselessly
      with a small watering-pot, attending to her flowers. She is
      dressed in black as before. Her hat, cloak and parasol lie on a
      chair near the mirror. Unobserved by her,_ SOLNESS _now and again
      follows her with his eyes. Neither of them speaks._

KAIA FOSLI _enters quietly by the door on the left._


                                SOLNESS.

[_Turns his head, and says in an off hand tone of indifference_] Well,
is that you?

                                 KAIA.

I merely wished to let you know that I have come.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, yes, that’s all right. Hasn’t Ragnar come too?

                                 KAIA.

No, not yet. He had to wait a little while to see the doctor. But he is
coming presently to hear——

                                SOLNESS.

How is the old man to-day?

                                 KAIA.

Not well. He begs you to excuse him; he is obliged to keep his bed
to-day.

                                SOLNESS.

Why, of course; by all means let him rest. But now, get to your work.

                                 KAIA.

Yes. [_Pauses at the door._] Do you wish to speak to Ragnar when he
comes?

                                SOLNESS.

No—I don’t know that I have anything particular to say to him.

          [KAIA _goes out again to the left._ SOLNESS _remains seated,
            turning over the drawings._

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Over beside the plants._] I wonder if he isn’t going to die now, as
well?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks up at her._] As well as who?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Without answering._] Yes, yes—depend upon it, Halvard, old Brovik is
going to die too. You’ll see that he will.

                                SOLNESS.

My dear Aline, ought you not to go out for a little walk?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes, I suppose I ought to.

                              [_She continues to attend to the flowers._

                                SOLNESS.

[_Bending over the drawings._] Is she still asleep?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Looking at him._] Is it Miss Wangel you are sitting there thinking
about?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Indifferently._] I just happened to recollect her.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Miss Wangel was up long ago.

                                SOLNESS.

Oh, was she?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

When I went in to see her, she was busy putting her things in order.

          [_She goes in front of the mirror and slowly begins to put on
            her hat._

                                SOLNESS.

[_After a short pause._] So we have found a use for one of our nurseries
after all, Aline.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes, we have.

                                SOLNESS.

That seems to me better than to have them all standing empty.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

That emptiness is dreadful; you are right there.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Closes the portfolio, rises and approaches her._] You will find that
we shall get on far better after this, Aline. Things will be more
comfortable. Life will be easier—especially for _you_.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Looks at him._] After this?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, believe me, Aline——

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Do you mean—because _she_ has come here?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Checking himself._] I mean, of course—when once we have moved into the
new house.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Takes her cloak._] Ah, do you think so, Halvard? Will it be better
then?

                                SOLNESS.

I can’t think otherwise. And surely you think so too?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

I think nothing at all about the new house.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Cast down._] It’s hard for me to hear you say that; for you know it is
mainly for your sake that I have built it.

                             [_He offers to help her on with her cloak._

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Evades him._] The fact is, you do far too much for my sake.

                                SOLNESS.

[_With a certain vehemence._] No, no, you really mustn’t say that,
Aline! I cannot bear to hear you say such things!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Very well, then I won’t say it, Halvard.

                                SOLNESS.

But I stick to what _I_ said. You’ll see that things will be easier for
you in the new place.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh heavens—easier for me——

                                SOLNESS.

[_Eagerly._] Yes, indeed they will! You may be quite sure of that! For
you see—there will be so very, very much _there_ that will remind you of
your own home——

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

The home that used to be father’s and mother’s—and that was burnt to the
ground——

                                SOLNESS.

[_In a low voice._] Yes, yes, my poor Aline. That was a terrible blow
for you.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Breaking out in lamentation._] You may build as much as ever you like,
Halvard—you can never build up again a real home for _me_!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Crosses the room._] Well, in Heaven’s name, let us talk no more about
it then.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

We are not in the habit of talking about it. For you always put the
thought away from you——

                                SOLNESS.

[_Stops suddenly and looks at her._] Do I? And why should I do _that_?
Put the thought away from me?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh yes, Halvard, I understand you very well. You are so anxious to spare
me—and to find excuses for me too—as much as ever you can.

                                SOLNESS.

[_With astonishment in his eyes._] _You!_ Is it _you_—yourself, that you
are talking about Aline?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes, who else should it be but myself?

                                SOLNESS.

[Involuntarily to himself.] _That_ too!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

As for the old house, I wouldn’t mind so much about that. When once
misfortune was in the air—why——

                                SOLNESS.

Ah, you are right there. Misfortune will have its way—as the saying
goes.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

But it’s what came of the fire—the dreadful thing that followed——!
_That_ is the thing! That, that, that!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Vehemently._] Don’t think about _that_, Aline!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Ah, that is exactly what I cannot help thinking about. And now, at last,
I must speak about it, too; for I don’t seem able to bear it any longer.
And then never to be able to forgive myself——

                                SOLNESS.

[_Exclaiming._] Yourself——!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes, for I had duties on both sides—both towards you and towards the
little ones. I ought to have hardened myself—not to have let the horror
take such hold upon me—nor the grief for the burning of my home.
[_Wrings her hands._] Oh, Halvard, if I had only had the strength!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Softly, much moved, comes closer._] Aline—you must promise me never to
think these thoughts any more.—Promise me that, dear!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh, promise, promise! One can promise anything.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Clenches his hands and crosses the room._] Oh, but this is hopeless,
hopeless! Never a ray of sunlight! Not so much as a gleam of brightness
to light up our home!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

This is no home, Halvard.

                                SOLNESS.

Oh no, you may well say that. [_Gloomily._] And God knows whether you
are not right in saying that it will be no better for us in the new
house, either.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

It will never be any better. Just as empty—just as desolate—there as
here.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Vehemently._] Why in all the world have we built it then! Can you tell
me that?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

No; you must answer that question for yourself.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Glances suspiciously at her._] What do you mean by _that_, Aline?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

What do I mean?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, in the devil’s name! You said it so strangely—as if you had some
hidden meaning in it.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

No, indeed, I assure you——

                                SOLNESS.

[_Comes closer._] Oh, come now—I know what I know. I have both my eyes
and my ears about me, Aline—you may depend upon that!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Why, what are you talking about? What is it?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Places himself in front of her._] Do you mean to say you don’t find a
kind of lurking, hidden meaning in the most innocent word I happen to
say?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

_I_, do you say? _I_ do that?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Laughs._] Ho-ho-ho! It’s natural enough, Aline! When you have a sick
man on your hands——

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Anxiously._] _Sick?_ Are you ill, Halvard?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Violently._] A half-mad man then! A crazy man! Call me what you will.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Feels blindly for a chair and sits down._] Halvard—for God’s sake——

                                SOLNESS.

But you are wrong, both you and the doctor. I am not in the state you
imagine.

          [_He walks up and down the room._ MRS. SOLNESS _follows him
            anxiously with her eyes. Finally he goes up to her._

                                SOLNESS.

[_Calmly._] In reality there is nothing whatever the matter with me.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

No, there isn’t, is there? But then what is it that troubles you so?

                                SOLNESS.

Why _this_, that I often feel ready to sink under this terrible burden
of debt——

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Debt, do you say? But you owe no one anything, Halvard!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Softly, with emotion._] I owe a boundless debt to you—to you—to you,
Aline.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Rises slowly._] What is behind all this? You may just as well tell me
at once.

                                SOLNESS.

But there is nothing behind it! I have never done you any wrong—not
wittingly and wilfully, at any rate. And yet—and yet it seems as though
a crushing debt rested upon me and weighed me down.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

A debt to me?

                                SOLNESS.

Chiefly to you.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Then you are—ill after all, Halvard.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Gloomily._] I suppose I must be—or not far from it. [_Looks towards
the door to the right, which is opened at this moment._] Ah! now it
grows lighter.

          HILDA WANGEL _comes in. She has made some alteration in her
            dress, and let down her skirt._

                                 HILDA.

Good morning, Mr. Solness!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Nods._] Slept well?

                                 HILDA.

Quite deliciously! Like a child in a cradle. Oh—I lay and stretched
myself like—like a princess!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Smiles a little._] You were thoroughly comfortable then?

                                 HILDA.

I should think so.

                                SOLNESS.

And no doubt you dreamed, too.

                                 HILDA.

Yes, I did. But _that_ was horrid.

                                SOLNESS.

Was it?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, for I dreamed I was falling over a frightfully high, sheer
precipice. Do you never have that kind of dream?

                                SOLNESS.

Oh yes—now and then——

                                 HILDA.

It’s tremendously thrilling—when you fall and fall——

                                SOLNESS.

It seems to make one’s blood run cold.

                                 HILDA.

Do you draw your legs up under you while you are falling?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, as high as ever I can.

                                 HILDA.

So do I.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Takes her parasol._] I must go into town now, Halvard. [_To HILDA._]
And I’ll try to get one or two things that you may require.

                                 HILDA.

[_Making a motion to throw her arms round her neck._] Oh, you dear,
sweet Mrs. Solness! You are really much too kind to me! Frightfully
kind——

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Deprecatingly, freeing herself._] Oh, not at all. It’s only my duty,
so I am very glad to do it.

                                 HILDA.

[_Offended, pouts._] But really, I think I am quite fit to be seen in
the streets—now that I’ve put my dress to rights. Or do you think I am
not?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

To tell you the truth, I think people would stare at you a little.

                                 HILDA.

[_Contemptuously._] Pooh! Is that all? That only amuses me.

                                SOLNESS.

[_With suppressed ill-humour._] Yes, but people might take it into their
heads that _you_ were mad too, you see.

                                 HILDA.

Mad? Are there so many mad people here in town, then?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Points to his own forehead._] Here you see _one_ at all events.

                                 HILDA.

You—Mr. Solness!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh, don’t talk like that, my dear Halvard!

                                SOLNESS.

Have you not noticed _that_ yet?

                                 HILDA.

No, I certainly have not. [_Reflects and laughs a little._] And
yet—perhaps in one single thing.

                                SOLNESS.

Ah, do you hear _that_, Aline?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

What is that one single thing, Miss Wangel?

                                 HILDA.

No, I won’t say.

                                SOLNESS.

Oh yes, do!

                                 HILDA.

No thank you—I am not so mad as that.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

When you and Miss Wangel are alone, I daresay she will tell you,
Halvard.

                                SOLNESS.

Ah—you think she will?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh yes, certainly. For you have known her so well in the past. Ever
since she was a child—you tell me.

                                [_She goes out by the door on the left._

                                 HILDA.

[_After a little while._] Does your wife dislike me very much?

                                SOLNESS.

Did you think you noticed anything of the kind?

                                 HILDA.

Did you not notice it yourself?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Evasively._] Aline has become exceedingly shy with strangers of late
years.

                                 HILDA.

Has she really?

                                SOLNESS.

But if only you could get to know her thoroughly——! Ah, she is so
good—so kind—so excellent a creature——

                                 HILDA.

[_Impatiently._] But if she is all that—what made her say that about her
duty?

                                SOLNESS.

Her duty?

                                 HILDA.

She said that she would go out and buy something for me, because it was
her _duty_. Oh I can’t bear that ugly, horrid word!

                                SOLNESS.

Why not?

                                 HILDA.

It sounds so cold, and sharp, and stinging. Duty—duty—duty. Don’t _you_
think so, too? Doesn’t it seem to sting you?

                                SOLNESS.

H’m—haven’t thought much about it.

                                 HILDA.

Yes, it does. And if she is so good—as you say she is—why should she
talk in that way?

                                SOLNESS.

But, good Lord, what would you have had her say, then?

                                 HILDA.

She might have said she would do it because she had taken a tremendous
fancy to me. She might have said something like that—something really
warm and cordial, you understand.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks at her._] Is that how you would like to have it?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, precisely. [_She wanders about the room, stops at the bookcase and
looks at the books._] What a lot of books you have.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, I have got together a good many.

                                 HILDA.

Do you read them all, too?

                                SOLNESS.

I used to try to. Do you read much?

                                 HILDA.

No, never! I have given it up. For it all seems so irrelevant.

                                SOLNESS.

That is just my feeling.

          [HILDA _wanders about a little, stops at the small table,
            opens the portfolio and turns over the contents._

                                 HILDA.

Are all these drawings yours?

                                SOLNESS.

No, they are drawn by a young man whom I employ to help me.

                                 HILDA.

Some one you have taught?

                                SOLNESS.

Oh yes, no doubt he has learnt something from _me_, too.

                                 HILDA.

[_Sits down._] Then I suppose he is very clever. [_Looks at a drawing._]
Isn’t he?

                                SOLNESS.

Oh, he might be worse. For _my_ purpose——

                                 HILDA.

Oh yes—I’m sure he is frightfully clever.

                                SOLNESS.

Do you think you can see that in the drawings?

                                 HILDA.

Pooh—these scrawlings! But if he has been learning from _you_——

                                SOLNESS.

Oh, so far as that goes——there are plenty of people here that have
learnt from _me_, and have come to little enough for all that.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks at him and shakes her head._] No, I can’t for the life of me
understand how you can be so stupid.

                                SOLNESS.

Stupid? Do you think I am so very stupid?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, I do indeed. If you are content to go about here teaching all these
people——

                                SOLNESS.

[_With a slight start._] Well, and why not?

                                 HILDA.

[_Rises, half serious, half laughing._] No indeed, Mr. Solness! What can
be the good of that? No one but _you_ should be allowed to build. You
should stand quite alone—do it all yourself. Now you know it.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Involuntarily._] Hilda——!

                                 HILDA.

Well!

                                SOLNESS.

How in the world did _that_ come into your head?

                                 HILDA.

Do you think I am so very far wrong then?

                                SOLNESS.

No, that’s not what I mean. But now I’ll tell you something.

                                 HILDA.

Well?

                                SOLNESS.

I keep on—incessantly—in silence and alone—brooding on that very
thought.

                                 HILDA.

Yes, that seems to me perfectly natural.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks somewhat searchingly at her._] Perhaps you have noticed it
already?

                                 HILDA.

No, indeed I haven’t.

                                SOLNESS.

But just now—when you said you thought I was—off my balance? In one
thing, you said——

                                 HILDA.

Oh, I was thinking of something quite different.

                                SOLNESS.

What was it?

                                 HILDA.

I am not going to tell you.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Crosses the room._] Well, well—as you please. [_Stops at the
bow-window._] Come here, and I will show you something.

                                 HILDA.

[_Approaching._] What is it?

                                SOLNESS.

Do you see—over there in the garden——?

                                 HILDA.

Yes?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Points._] Right above the great quarry——?

                                 HILDA.

That new house, you mean?

                                SOLNESS.

The one that is being built, yes. Almost finished.

                                 HILDA.

It seems to have a very high tower.

                                SOLNESS.

The scaffolding is still up.

                                 HILDA.

Is that your new house?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes.

                                 HILDA.

The house you are soon going to move into?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks at him._] Are there nurseries in _that_ house, too?

                                SOLNESS.

Three, as there are here.

                                 HILDA.

And no child.

                                SOLNESS.

And there never will be one.

                                 HILDA.

[_With a half-smile._] Well, isn’t it just as I said——?

                                SOLNESS.

That——?

                                 HILDA.

That you _are_ a little—a little mad after all.

                                SOLNESS.

Was that what you were thinking of?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, of all the empty nurseries I slept in.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Lowers his voice._] We _have_ had children—Aline and I.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks eagerly at him._] Have you——?

                                SOLNESS.

Two little boys. They were of the same age.

                                 HILDA.

Twins, then.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, twins. It’s eleven or twelve years ago now.

                                 HILDA.

[_Cautiously._] And so both of them——? You have lost both the twins,
then?

                                SOLNESS.

[_With quiet emotion._] We kept them only about three weeks. Or scarcely
so much. [_Bursts forth._] Oh, Hilda, I can’t tell you what a good thing
it is for me that you have come! For now at last I have some one I can
talk to!

                                 HILDA.

Can you not talk to—_her_, too?

                                SOLNESS.

Not about this. Not as I want to talk and must talk. [_Gloomily._] And
not about so many other things, either.

                                 HILDA.

[_In a subdued voice._] Was that all you meant when you said you needed
me?

                                SOLNESS.

That was mainly what I meant—at all events, yesterday. For to-day I am
not so sure—[_Breaking off._] Come here and let us sit down, Hilda. Sit
there on the sofa—so that you can look into the garden. [_HILDA seats
herself in the corner of the sofa. SOLNESS brings a chair closer._]
Should you like to hear about it?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, I shall love to sit and listen to you.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Sits down._] Then I will tell you all about it.

                                 HILDA.

Now I can see both the garden and you, Mr. Solness. So now, tell away!
Begin!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Points towards the bow-window._] Out there on the rising ground—where
you see the new house——

                                 HILDA.

Yes?

                                SOLNESS.

Aline and I lived there in the first years of our married life. There
was an old house up there that had belonged to her mother; and we
inherited it, and the whole of the great garden with it.

                                 HILDA.

Was there a tower on _that_ house, too?

                                SOLNESS.

No, nothing of the kind. From the outside it looked like a great, dark,
ugly wooden box; but all the same, it was snug and comfortable enough
inside.

                                 HILDA.

Then did you pull down the ramshackle old place?

                                SOLNESS.

No, it was burnt down.

                                 HILDA.

The whole of it?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes.

                                 HILDA.

Was that a great misfortune for you?

                                SOLNESS.

That depends on how you look at it. As a builder, the fire was the
making of me——

                                 HILDA.

Well, but——?

                                SOLNESS.

It was just after the birth of the two little boys——

                                 HILDA.

The poor little twins, yes.

                                SOLNESS.

They came healthy and bonny into the world. And they were growing
too—you could see the difference from day to day.

                                 HILDA.

Little children do grow quickly at first.

                                SOLNESS.

It was the prettiest sight in the world to see Aline lying with the two
of them in her arms.—But then came the night of the fire——

                                 HILDA.

[_Excitedly._] What happened? Do tell me! Was any one burnt?

                                SOLNESS.

No, not that. Every one got safe and sound out of the house——

                                 HILDA.

Well, and what then——?

                                SOLNESS.

The fright had shaken Aline terribly. The alarm—the escape—the
break-neck hurry—and then the ice-cold night air—for they had to be
carried out just as they lay—both she and the little ones.

                                 HILDA.

Was it too much for them?

                                SOLNESS.

Oh no, _they_ stood it well enough. But Aline fell into a fever, and it
affected her milk. She would insist on nursing them herself; because it
was her duty, she said. And both our little boys, they—[_Clenching his
hands._]—they—oh!

                                 HILDA.

They did not get over _that_?

                                SOLNESS.

No, _that_ they did not get over. _That_ was how we lost them.

                                 HILDA.

It must have been terribly hard for you.

                                SOLNESS.

Hard enough for me; but ten times harder for Aline. [_Clenching his
hands in suppressed fury._] Oh, that such things should be allowed to
happen here in the world! [_Shortly and firmly._] From the day I lost
them, I had no heart for building churches.

                                 HILDA.

Did you not like building the church-tower in our town?

                                SOLNESS.

I didn’t like it. I know how free and happy I felt when that tower was
finished.

                                 HILDA.

_I_ know that, too.

                                SOLNESS.

And now I shall never—never build anything of that sort again! Neither
churches nor church-towers.

                                 HILDA.

[_Nods slowly._] Nothing but houses for people to live in.

                                SOLNESS.

Homes for human beings, Hilda.

                                 HILDA.

But homes with high towers and pinnacles upon them.

                                SOLNESS.

If possible. [_Adopts a lighter tone._] But, as I said before, that fire
was the making of me—as a builder, I mean.

                                 HILDA.

Why don’t you call yourself an architect, like the others?

                                SOLNESS.

I have not been systematically enough taught for that. Most of what I
know I have found out for myself.

                                 HILDA.

But you succeeded all the same.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, thanks to the fire. I laid out almost the whole of the garden in
villa lots; and _there_ I was able to build after my own heart. So I
came to the front with a rush.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks keenly at him._] You must surely be a very happy man, as matters
stand with you.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Gloomily._] Happy? Do _you_ say that, too—like all the rest of them?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, I should say you must be. If you could only cease thinking about
the two little children——

                                SOLNESS.

[_Slowly._] The two little children—they are not so easy to forget,
Hilda.

                                 HILDA.

[_Somewhat uncertainly._] Do you still feel their loss so much—after all
these years?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks fixedly at her, without replying._] A happy man you said——

                                 HILDA.

Well, now, _are_ you not happy—in other respects?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Continues to look at her._] When I told you all this about the
fire—h’m——

                                 HILDA.

Well?

                                SOLNESS.

Was there not one special thought that you—that you seized upon?

                                 HILDA.

[Reflects in vain.] No. What thought should _that_ be?

                                SOLNESS.

[_With subdued emphasis._] It was simply and solely by that fire that I
was enabled to build homes for human beings. Cosy, comfortable, bright
homes, where father and mother and the whole troop of children can live
in safety and gladness, feeling what a happy thing it is to be alive in
the world—and most of all to belong to each other—in great things and in
small.

                                 HILDA.

[_Ardently._] Well, and is it not a great happiness for you to be able
to build such beautiful homes?

                                SOLNESS.

The price, Hilda! The terrible price I had to pay for the opportunity!

                                 HILDA.

But can you _never_ get over that?

                                SOLNESS.

No. That I might build homes for others, I had to forego—to forego for
all time—the home that might have been my own. I mean a home for a troop
of children—and for father and mother, too.

                                 HILDA.

[_Cautiously._] But _need_ you have done that? For all time, you say?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Nods slowly._] _That_ was the price of this happiness that people talk
about. [_Breathes heavily._] This happiness—h’m—this happiness was not
to be bought any cheaper, Hilda.

                                 HILDA.

[_As before._] But may it not come right even yet?

                                SOLNESS.

Never in this world—never. That is another consequence of the fire—and
of Aline’s illness afterwards.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks at him with an indefinable expression._] And yet you build all
these nurseries?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Seriously._] Have you never noticed, Hilda, how the impossible—how it
seems to beckon and cry aloud to one?

                                 HILDA.

[_Reflecting._] The impossible? [_With animation._] Yes, indeed! Is that
how _you_ feel too?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, I do.

                                 HILDA.

Then there must be—a little of the troll in you too.

                                SOLNESS.

Why of the troll?

                                 HILDA.

What would you call it, then?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Rises._] Well, well, perhaps you are right. [_Vehemently._] But how
can I help turning into a troll, when this is how it always goes with me
in everything—in everything!

                                 HILDA.

How do you mean?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Speaking low, with inward emotion._] Mark what I say to you, Hilda.
All that I have succeeded in doing, building, creating—all the beauty,
security, cheerful comfort—ay, and magnificence too—[_Clenches his
hands._] Oh, is it not terrible even to think of——!

                                 HILDA.

_What_ is so terrible?

                                SOLNESS.

That all this I have to make up for, to pay for—not in money, but in
human happiness. And not with my own happiness only, but with other
people’s too. Yes, yes, do you see _that_, Hilda? That is the price
which my position as an artist has cost me—and others. And every single
day I have to look on while the price is paid for me anew. Over again,
and over again—and over again for ever!

                                 HILDA.

[_Rises and looks steadily at him._] Now I can see that you are thinking
of—of _her_.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, mainly of Aline. For Aline—_she_, too, had her vocation in life,
just as much as I had mine. [_His voice quivers._] But her vocation has
had to be stunted, and crushed, and shattered—in order that mine might
force its way to—to a sort of great victory. For you must know that
Aline—she, too, had a talent for building.

                                 HILDA.

She! For building?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Shakes his head._] Not houses and towers, and spires—not such things
as I work away at——

                                 HILDA.

Well, but _what_ then?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Softly, with emotion._] For building up the souls of little children,
Hilda. For building up children’s souls in perfect balance, and in noble
and beautiful forms. For enabling them to soar up into erect and
full-grown human souls. _That_ was Aline’s talent. And there it all lies
now—unused and unusable for ever—of no earthly service to any one—just
like the ruins left by a fire.

                                 HILDA.

Yes, but even if this were so——?

                                SOLNESS.

It is so! It is so! I know it!

                                 HILDA.

Well, but in any case it is not _your_ fault.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Fixes his eyes on her, and nods slowly._] Ah, _that_ is the great, the
terrible question. _That_ is the doubt that is gnawing me—night and day.

                                 HILDA.

That?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes. Suppose the fault _was_ mine—in a certain sense.

                                 HILDA.

Your fault! The fire!

                                SOLNESS.

All of it; the whole thing. And yet, perhaps—I may not have had anything
to do with it.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks at him with a troubled expression._] Oh, Mr. Solness—if you can
talk like that, I am afraid you must be—ill, after all.

                                SOLNESS.

H’m—I don’t think I shall ever be of quite sound mind on that point.

RAGNAR BROVIK _cautiously opens the little door in the left-hand
    corner._ HILDA _comes forward._

                                RAGNAR.

[_When he sees HILDA._] Oh. I beg pardon, Mr. Solness——

                                     [_He makes a movement to withdraw._

                                SOLNESS.

No, no, don’t go. Let us get it over.

                                RAGNAR.

Oh, yes—if only we could.

                                SOLNESS.

I hear your father is no better?

                                RAGNAR.

Father is fast growing weaker—and therefore I beg and implore you to
write a few kind words for me on one of the plans! Something for father
to read before he——

                                SOLNESS.

[_Vehemently._] I won’t hear anything more about those drawings of
yours!

                                RAGNAR.

Have you looked at them?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes—I have.

                                RAGNAR.

And they are good for nothing? And _I_ am good for nothing, too?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Evasively._] Stay here with me, Ragnar. You shall have everything your
own way. And then you can marry Kaia, and live at your ease—and happily
too, who knows? Only don’t think of building on your own account.

                                RAGNAR.

Well, well, then I must go home and tell father what you say—I promised
I would.—Is this what I am to tell father—before he dies?

                                SOLNESS.

[_With a groan._] Oh tell him—tell him what you will, for me. Best to
say nothing at all to him! [_With a sudden outburst._] I _cannot_ do
anything else, Ragnar!

                                RAGNAR.

May I have the drawings to take with me?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, take them—take them by all means! They are lying there on the
table.

                                RAGNAR.

[_Goes to the table._] Thanks.

                                 HILDA.

[_Puts her hand on the portfolio._] No, no; leave them here.

                                SOLNESS.

Why?

                                 HILDA.

Because I want to look at them, too.

                                SOLNESS.

But you _have_ been——[_To RAGNAR._] Well, leave them here, then.

                                RAGNAR.

Very well.

                                SOLNESS.

And go home at once to your father.

                                RAGNAR.

Yes, I suppose I must.

                                SOLNESS.

[_As if in desperation._] Ragnar—you _must_ not ask me to do what is
beyond my power! Do you hear, Ragnar? You _must_ not!

                                RAGNAR.

No, no. I beg your pardon——

          [_He bows, and goes out by the corner door._ HILDA _goes over
            and sits down on a chair near the mirror._

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks angrily at SOLNESS._] That was a very ugly thing to do.

                                SOLNESS.

Do _you_ think so, too?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, it was horribly ugly—and hard and bad and cruel as well.

                                SOLNESS.

Oh, you don’t understand my position.

                                 HILDA.

No matter——. I say you ought not to be like that.

                                SOLNESS.

You said yourself, only just now, that no one but _I_ ought to be
allowed to build.

                                 HILDA.

_I_ may say such things—but _you_ must not.

                                SOLNESS.

I most of all, surely, who have paid so dear for my position.

                                 HILDA.

Oh yes—with what you call domestic comfort—and that sort of thing.

                                SOLNESS.

And with my peace of soul into the bargain.

                                 HILDA.

[_Rising._] Peace of soul! [_With feeling._] Yes, yes, you are right in
that! Poor Mr. Solness—you fancy that——

                                SOLNESS.

[_With a quiet, chuckling laugh._] Just sit down again, Hilda, and I’ll
tell you something funny.

                                 HILDA.

[_Sits down; with intent interest._] Well?

                                SOLNESS.

It sounds such a ludicrous little thing; for, you see, the whole story
turns upon nothing but a crack in a chimney.

                                 HILDA.

No more than that?

                                SOLNESS.

No, not to begin with.

          [_He moves a chair nearer to_ HILDA _and sits down._

                                 HILDA.

[_Impatiently, taps on her knee._] Well, now for the crack in the
chimney!

                                SOLNESS.

I had noticed the split in the flue long, long before the fire. Every
time I went up into the attic, I looked to see if it was still there.

                                 HILDA.

And it _was_?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes; for no one else knew about it.

                                 HILDA.

And you said nothing?

                                SOLNESS.

Nothing.

                                 HILDA.

And did not think of repairing the flue either?

                                SOLNESS.

Oh yes, I thought about it—but never got any further. Every time I
intended to set to work, it seemed just as if a hand held me back. Not
to-day, I thought—to-morrow; and nothing ever came of it.

                                 HILDA.

But why did you keep putting it off like that?

                                SOLNESS.

Because I was revolving something in my mind. [_Slowly, and in a low
voice._] Through that little black crack in the chimney, I might,
perhaps, force my way upwards—as a builder.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looking straight in front of her._] That must have been thrilling.

                                SOLNESS.

Almost irresistible—quite irresistible. For at that time it appeared to
me a perfectly simple and straightforward matter. I would have had it
happen in the winter-time—a little before midday. I was to be out
driving Aline in the sleigh. The servants at home would have made huge
fires in the stoves.

                                 HILDA.

For, of course, it was to be bitterly cold that day?

                                SOLNESS.

Rather biting, yes—and they would want Aline to find it thoroughly snug
and warm when she came home.

                                 HILDA.

I suppose she is very chilly by nature?

                                SOLNESS.

She _is_. And as we drove home, we were to see the smoke.

                                 HILDA.

Only the smoke?

                                SOLNESS.

The smoke first. But when we came up to the garden gate, the whole of
the old timber-box was to be a rolling mass of flames.—That is how I
wanted it to be, you see.

                                 HILDA.

Oh why, _why_ could it not have happened so!

                                SOLNESS.

You may well say that, Hilda.

                                 HILDA.

Well, but now listen, Mr. Solness. Are you perfectly certain that the
fire was caused by that little crack in the chimney!

                                SOLNESS.

No, on the contrary—I am perfectly certain that the crack in the chimney
had nothing whatever to do with the fire.

                                 HILDA.

What!

                                SOLNESS.

It has been clearly ascertained that the fire broke out in a
clothes-cupboard—in a totally different part of the house.

                                 HILDA.

Then what is all this nonsense you are talking about the crack in the
chimney!

                                SOLNESS.

May I go on talking to you a little, Hilda?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, if you’ll only talk sensibly——

                                SOLNESS.

I will try to.                            [_He moves his chair nearer._

                                 HILDA.

Out with it, then, Mr. Solness.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Confidentially._] Don’t you agree with me, Hilda, that there exist
special, chosen people who have been endowed with the power and faculty
of _desiring_ a thing, _craving_ for a thing, _willing_ a thing—so
persistently and so—so inexorably— that at last it has to _happen_?
Don’t you believe that?

                                 HILDA.

[_With an indefinable expression in her eyes._] If that is so, we shall
see, one of these days, whether _I_ am one of the chosen.

                                SOLNESS.

It is not one’s self _alone_ that can do such great things. Oh, no—the
helpers and the servers—they must do their part too, if it is to be of
any good. But they never come of themselves. One has to call upon them
very persistently—inwardly, you understand.

                                 HILDA.

What are these helpers and servers?

                                SOLNESS.

Oh, we can talk about that some other time. For the present, let us keep
to this business of the fire.

                                 HILDA.

Don’t you think that fire would have happened all the same—even without
your wishing for it?

                                SOLNESS.

If the house had been old Knut Brovik’s, it would never have burnt down
so conveniently for him. I am sure of that; for he does not know how to
call for the helpers—no, nor for the servers, either. [_Rises in
unrest._] So you see, Hilda—it is my fault, after all, that the lives of
the two little boys had to be sacrificed. And do you think it is not my
fault, too, that Aline has never been the woman she should and might
have been—and that she most longed to be?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, but if it is all the work of those helpers and servers——?

                                SOLNESS.

Who called for the helpers and servers? It was I! And they came and
obeyed my will. [_In increasing excitement._] _That_ is what people call
having the luck on your side; but I must tell you what this sort of luck
feels like! It feels like a great raw place here on my breast. And the
helpers and servers keep on flaying pieces of skin off other people in
order to close my sore!—But still the sore is not healed—never, never!
Oh, if you knew how it can sometimes gnaw and burn.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks attentively at him._] You are ill, Mr. Solness. Very ill, I
almost think.

                                SOLNESS.

Say _mad_; for that is what you mean.

                                 HILDA.

No, I don’t think there is much amiss with your intellect.

                                SOLNESS.

With _what_ then? Out with it!

                                 HILDA.

I wonder whether you were not sent into the world with a sickly
conscience.

                                SOLNESS.

A sickly conscience? What devilry is that?

                                 HILDA.

I mean that your conscience is feeble—too delicately built, as it
were—hasn’t strength to take a grip of things—to lift and bear what is
heavy.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Growls._] H’m! May I ask, then, what sort of a conscience one ought to
have?

                                 HILDA.

I should like _your_ conscience to be—to be thoroughly robust.

                                SOLNESS.

Indeed? Robust, eh? Is your own conscience robust, may I ask?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, I think it is. I have never noticed that it wasn’t.

                                SOLNESS.

It has not been put very severely to the test, I should think.

                                 HILDA.

[_With a quivering of the lips._] Oh, it was no such simple matter to
leave father—I am so awfully fond of him.

                                SOLNESS.

Dear me! for a month or two——

                                 HILDA.

I think I shall never go home again.

                                SOLNESS.

Never? Then why did you leave him?

                                 HILDA.

[_Half-seriously, half-banteringly._] Have you forgotten again that the
ten years are up?

                                SOLNESS.

Oh nonsense. Was anything wrong at home? Eh?

                                 HILDA.

[_Quite seriously._] It was this impulse within me that urged and goaded
me to come—and lured and drew me on, as well.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Eagerly._] There, we have it! There we have it, Hilda! There is a
troll in you too, as in me. For it’s the troll in one, you see—it is
_that_ that calls to the powers outside us. And then you _must_ give
in—whether you will or no.

                                 HILDA.

I almost think you are right, Mr. Solness.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Walks about the room._] Oh, there are devils innumerable abroad in the
world, Hilda, that one never _sees_!

                                 HILDA.

Devils, too?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Stops._] Good devils and bad devils; light-haired devils and
black-haired devils. If only you could always tell whether it is the
light or dark ones that have got hold of you! [_Paces about._] Ho-ho!
Then it would be simple enough!

                                 HILDA.

[_Follows him with her eyes._] Or if one had a really vigorous,
radiantly healthy conscience—so that one _dared_ to do what one _would_.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Stops beside the console table._] I believe, now, that most people are
just as puny creatures as I am in that respect.

                                 HILDA.

I shouldn’t wonder.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Leaning against the table._] In the sagas——. Have you read any of the
old sagas?

                                 HILDA.

Oh yes! When I used to read books, I——

                                SOLNESS.

In the sagas you read about vikings, who sailed to foreign lands, and
plundered and burned and killed men——

                                 HILDA.

And carried off women——

                                SOLNESS.

——and kept them in captivity——

                                 HILDA.

——took them home in their ships——

                                SOLNESS.

——and behaved to them like—like the very worst of trolls.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks straight before her, with a half-veiled look._] I think _that_
must have been thrilling.

                                SOLNESS.

[_With a short, deep laugh._] To carry off women eh?

                                 HILDA.

To be carried off.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks at her a moment._] Oh, indeed.

                                 HILDA.

[_As if breaking the thread of the conversation._] But what made you
speak of these vikings, Mr. Solness?

                                SOLNESS.

Why, _those_ fellows must have had robust consciences, if you like! When
they got home again, they could eat and drink, and be as happy as
children. And the women, too! They often would not leave them on any
account. Can you understand that, Hilda?

                                 HILDA.

Those women I can understand exceedingly well.

                                SOLNESS.

Oho! Perhaps you could do the same yourself?

                                 HILDA.

Why not?

                                SOLNESS.

Live—of your own free will—with a ruffian like that?

                                 HILDA.

If it was a ruffian I had come to love——

                                SOLNESS.

_Could_ you come to love a man like that?

                                 HILDA.

Good heavens, you know very well one can’t choose whom one is going to
love.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks meditatively at her._] Oh no, I suppose it is the troll within
one that’s responsible for that.

                                 HILDA.

[_Half-laughing._] And all those blessëd devils, that _you_ know so
well—both the light-haired and the dark-haired ones.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Quietly and warmly._] Then I hope with all my heart that the devils
will choose carefully for you, Hilda.

                                 HILDA.

For me they _have_ chosen already—once and for all.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks earnestly at her._] Hilda—you are like a wild bird of the woods.

                                 HILDA.

Far from it. I don’t hide myself away under the bushes.

                                SOLNESS.

No, no. There is rather something of the bird of prey in you.

                                 HILDA.

That is nearer it—perhaps. [_Very vehemently._] And why not a bird of
prey? Why should not _I_ go a-hunting—I, as well as the rest? Carry off
the prey I want—if only I can get my claws into it, and do with it as I
will.

                                SOLNESS.

Hilda—do you know what you are?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, I suppose I am a strange sort of bird.

                                SOLNESS.

No. You are like a dawning day. When I look at you—I seem to be looking
towards the sunrise.

                                 HILDA.

Tell me, Mr. Solness—are you certain that you have never called me to
you? Inwardly, you know?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Softly and slowly._] I almost think I must have.

                                 HILDA.

What did you want with me?

                                SOLNESS.

You are the younger generation, Hilda.

                                 HILDA.

[_Smiles._] That younger generation that you are so afraid of?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Nods slowly._] And which, in my heart, I yearn towards so deeply.

          [HILDA _rises, goes to the little table, and fetches_ RAGNAK
            BROVIK’S _portfolio._

                                 HILDA.

[_Holds out the portfolio to him._] We were talking of these drawings——

                                SOLNESS.

[_Shortly, waving them away._] Put those things away! I have seen enough
of them.

                                 HILDA.

Yes, but you have to write your approval on them.

                                SOLNESS.

Write my approval on them? Never!

                                 HILDA.

But the poor old man is lying at death’s door! Can’t you give him and
his son this pleasure before they are parted? And perhaps he might get
the commission to carry them out, too.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, that is just what he would get. He has made sure of that—has my
fine gentleman!

                                 HILDA.

Then, good heavens—if that is so—can’t you tell the least little bit of
a lie for once in a way?

                                SOLNESS.

A lie? [_Raging._] Hilda—take those devil’s drawings out of my sight!

                                 HILDA.

[_Draws the portfolio a little nearer to herself._] Well well,
well—don’t bite me.—You talk of trolls—but I think you go on like a
troll yourself. [_Looks round._] Where do you keep your pen and ink?

                                SOLNESS.

There is nothing of the sort in here.

                                 HILDA.

[_Goes towards the door._] But in the office where that young lady is——

                                SOLNESS.

Stay where you are, Hilda!—I ought to tell a lie, you say. Oh yes, for
the sake of his old father I might well do that—for in my time I have
crushed him, trodden him under foot——

                                 HILDA.

Him, too?

                                SOLNESS.

I needed room for myself. But this Ragnar—he must on no account be
allowed to come to the front.

                                 HILDA.

Poor fellow, there is surely no fear of that. If he has nothing in him——

                                SOLNESS.

[_Comes closer, looks at her, and whispers._] If Ragnar Brovik gets his
chance, he will strike _me_ to the earth. Crush me—as I crushed his
father.

                                 HILDA.

Crush you? Has he the ability for that?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, you may depend upon it he has the ability! He is the younger
generation that stands ready to knock at my door—to make an end of
Halvard Solness.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks at him with quiet reproach._] And yet you would bar him out.
Fie, Mr. Solness!

                                SOLNESS.

The fight I have been fighting has cost heart’s blood enough.—And I am
afraid, too, that the helpers and servers will not obey me any longer.

                                 HILDA.

Then you must go ahead without them. There is nothing else for it.

                                SOLNESS.

It is hopeless, Hilda. The luck is bound to turn. A little sooner or a
little later. Retribution is inexorable.

                                 HILDA.

[_In distress, putting her hands over her ears._] Don’t talk like that!
Do you want to kill me? To take from me what is more than my life?

                                SOLNESS.

And what is that?

                                 HILDA.

The longing to see you great. To see you, with a wreath in your hand,
high, high up upon a church-tower. [_Calm again._] Come, out with your
pencil now. You must have a pencil about you?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Takes out his pocket-book._] I have one here.

                                 HILDA.

[_Lays the portfolio on the sofa-table._] Very well. Now let us two sit
down here, Mr. Solness. [_SOLNESS seats himself at the table. HILDA
stands behind him, leaning over the back of the chair._] And now we will
write on the drawings. We must write very, very nicely and cordially—for
this horrid Ruar—or whatever his name is.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Writes a few words, turns his head and looks at her._] Tell me one
thing, Hilda.

                                 HILDA.

Yes!

                                SOLNESS.

If you have been waiting for me all these ten years——

                                 HILDA.

What then?

                                SOLNESS.

Why have you never written to me? Then I could have answered you.

                                 HILDA.

[_Hastily._] No, no, no! That was just what I did not want.

                                SOLNESS.

Why not?

                                 HILDA.

I was afraid the whole thing might fall to pieces.—But we were going to
write on the drawings, Mr. Solness.

                                SOLNESS.

So we were.

                                 HILDA.

[_Bends forward and looks over his shoulder while he writes._] Mind now,
kindly and cordially! Oh how I hate—how I hate this Ruald——

                                SOLNESS.

[_Writing._] Have you never really cared for any one, Hilda?

                                 HILDA.

[_Harshly._] What do you say?

                                SOLNESS.

Have you never cared for any one?

                                 HILDA.

For any one else, I suppose you mean?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks up at her._] For any one else, yes. Have you never? In all these
ten years? Never?

                                 HILDA.

Oh yes, now and then. When I was perfectly furious with you for not
coming.

                                SOLNESS.

Then you did take an interest in other people, too?

                                 HILDA.

A little bit—for a week or so. Good heavens, Mr. Solness, you surely
know how such things come about.

                                SOLNESS.

Hilda—what is it you have come for?

                                 HILDA.

Don’t waste time talking. The poor old man might go and die in the
meantime.

                                SOLNESS.

Answer me Hilda. What do you want of me?

                                 HILDA.

I want my kingdom.

                                SOLNESS.

H’m——

_He gives a rapid glance towards the door on the left, and then goes on
    writing on the drawings. At the same moment_ MRS. SOLNESS _enters;
    she has some packages in her hand._

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Here are a few things I have got for you, Miss Wangel. The large parcels
will be sent later on.

                                 HILDA.

Oh, how very, very kind of you!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Only my simple duty. Nothing more than that.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Reading over what he has written._] Aline!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes?

                                SOLNESS.

Did you notice whether the—the book-keeper was out there?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes, of course, she was there.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Puts the drawings in the portfolio._] H’m——

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

She was standing at the desk, as she always is—when _I_ go through the
room.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Rises._] Then I’ll give this to her, and tell her that——

                                 HILDA.

[_Takes the portfolio from him._] Oh, no, let me have the pleasure of
doing that! [_Goes to the door, but turns._] What is her name?

                                SOLNESS.

Her name is Miss Fosli.

                                 HILDA.

Pooh, that sounds so cold! Her Christian name, I mean?

                                SOLNESS.

Kaia—I believe.

                                 HILDA.

[_Opens the door and calls out._] Kaia, come in here! Make haste! Mr.
Solness wants to speak to you.

                   _KAIA FOSLID appears at the door._

                                 KAIA.

[_Looking at him in alarm._] Here I am——?

                                 HILDA.

[_Handing her the portfolio._] See here, Kaia! You can take this home;
Mr. Solness has written on them now.

                                 KAIA.

Oh, at last!

                                SOLNESS.

Give them to the old man as soon as you can.

                                 KAIA.

I will go straight home with them.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, do. Now Ragnar will have a chance of building for himself.

                                 KAIA.

Oh, may he come and thank you for all——?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Harshly._] I won’t have any thanks! Tell him _that_ from me.

                                 KAIA.

Yes, I will——

                                SOLNESS.

And tell him at the same time that henceforward I do not require his
services—nor yours either.

                                 KAIA.

[_Softly and quiveringly._] Not mine either?

                                SOLNESS.

You will have other things to think of now, and to attend to; and that
is a very good thing for you. Well, go home with the drawings now, Miss
Fosli. At once! Do you hear?

                                 KAIA.

[_As before._] Yes, Mr. Solness.                       [_She goes out._

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Heavens! what deceitful eyes she has.

                                SOLNESS.

She? That poor little creature?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh—I can see what I can see, Halvard.——Are you really dismissing them?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Her as well?

                                SOLNESS.

Was not that what you wished?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

But how can you get on without _her_——? Oh well, no doubt you have some
one else in reserve, Halvard.

                                 HILDA.

[_Playfully._] Well, _I_ for one am not the person to stand at that
desk.

                                SOLNESS.

Never mind, never mind—it will be all right. Aline. Now all you have to
do is to think about moving into our new home—as quickly as you can.
This evening we will hang up the wreath—[_Turns to HILDA._]—right on the
very pinnacle of the tower. What do you say to that, Miss Hilda?

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks at him with sparkling eyes._] It will be splendid to see you so
high up once more.

                                SOLNESS.

Me!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

For Heaven’s sake, Miss Wangel, don’t imagine such a thing! My
husband!—when he always gets so dizzy!

                                 HILDA.

_He_ get dizzy! No, I know quite well he does not!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh yes, indeed he does.

                                 HILDA.

But I have seen him with my own eyes right up at the top of a high
church-tower!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes, I hear people talk of that; but it is utterly impossible——

                                SOLNESS.

[_Vehemently._] Impossible—impossible, yes! But there I stood all the
same!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh, how can you say so, Halvard? Why, you can’t even bear to go out on
the second-storey balcony here. You have always been like that.

                                SOLNESS.

You may perhaps see something different this evening.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_In alarm._] No, no, no! Please God I shall never see that. I will
write at once to the doctor—and I am sure he won’t let you do it.

                                SOLNESS.

Why, Aline——!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh, you know you’re ill, Halvard. This _proves_ it! Oh God—Oh God!

                                   [_She goes hastily out to the right._

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks intently at him._] Is it so, or is it not?

                                SOLNESS.

That I turn dizzy?

                                 HILDA.

That my master builder _dares_ not—_cannot_—climb as high as he builds?

                                SOLNESS.

Is that the way you look at it?

                                 HILDA.

Yes.

                                SOLNESS.

I believe there is scarcely a corner in me that is safe from you.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks towards the bow-window._] Up there, then. Right up there——

                                SOLNESS.

[_Approaches her._] You might have the topmost room in the tower,
Hilda—there you might live like a princess.

                                 HILDA.

[_Indefinably, between earnest and jest._] Yes, that is what you
promised me.

                                SOLNESS.

_Did_ I really?

                                 HILDA.

Fie, Mr. Solness! You said I should be a princess, and that you would
give me a kingdom. And then you went and——Well!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Cautiously._] Are you quite certain that this is not a dream—a fancy,
that has fixed itself in your mind?

                                 HILDA.

[_Sharply._] Do you mean that you did not do it?

                                SOLNESS.

I scarcely know myself. [_More softly._] But now I know so _much_ for
certain, that I——-

                                 HILDA.

That you——? Say it at once!

                                SOLNESS.

——that I _ought_ to have done it.

                                 HILDA.

[_Exclaims with animation._] Don’t tell me _you_ can ever be dizzy!

                                SOLNESS.

This evening, then, we will hang up the wreath—Princess Hilda.

                                 HILDA.

[_With a bitter curve of the lips._] Over your new home, yes.

                                SOLNESS.

Over the new house, which will never be a _home_ for me.

                                 [_He goes out through the garden door._

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks straight in front of her with a far-away expression, and
whispers to herself. The only words audible are_]——frightfully
thrilling——




                               ACT THIRD.

_The large, broad verandah of_ SOLNESS’S _dwelling-house. Part of the
      house, with outer door leading to the verandah, is seen to the
      left. A railing along the verandah to the right. At the back, from
      the end of the verandah, a flight of steps leads down to the
      garden below. Tall old trees in the garden spread their branches
      over the verandah and towards the house. Far to the right, in
      among the trees, a glimpse is caught of the lower part of the new
      villa, with scaffolding round so much as is seen of the tower. In
      the background the garden is bounded by an old wooden fence.
      Outside the fence, a street with low, tumble-down cottages._

_Evening sky with sun-lit clouds._

_On the verandah, a garden bench stands along the wall of the house, and
      in front of the bench a long table. On the other side of the
      table, an arm-chair and some stools. All the furniture is of
      wicker-work._

MRS. SOLNESS, _wrapped in a large white crape shawl, sits resting in the
      arm-chair and gazes over to the right. Shortly after,_ HILDA
      WANGEL _comes up the flight of steps from the garden. She is
      dressed as in the last act, and wears her hat. She has in her
      bodice a little nosegay of small common flowers._

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Turning her head a little._] Have you been round the garden, Miss
Wangel?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, I have been taking a look at it.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

And found some flowers too, I see.

                                 HILDA.

Yes, indeed! There are such heaps of them in among the bushes.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Are there really? Still? You see I scarcely ever go there.

                                 HILDA.

[_Closer._] What! Don’t you take a run down into the garden every day,
then?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_With a faint smile._] I don’t “run” anywhere, nowadays.

                                 HILDA.

Well, but do you not go down now and then to look at all the lovely
things there?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

It has all become so strange to me. I am almost afraid to see it again.

                                 HILDA.

Your own garden!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

I don’t feel that it is _mine_ any longer.

                                 HILDA.

What do you mean——?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

No, no, it is not—not as it was in my mother’s and father’s time. They
have taken away so much—so much of the garden, Miss Wangel. Fancy—they
have parcelled it out—and built houses for strangers—people that I don’t
know. And _they_ can sit and look in upon me from their windows.

                                 HILDA.

[_With a bright expression._] Mrs. Solness!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes!

                                 HILDA.

May I stay here with you a little?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes, by all means, if you care to.

          [HILDA _moves a stool close to the arm-chair and sits down._

                                 HILDA.

Ah—here one can sit and sun oneself like a cat.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Lays her hand softly on HILDA’S neck._] It is nice of you to be
willing to sit with me. I thought you wanted to go in to my husband.

                                 HILDA.

What should I want with him?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

To help him, I thought.

                                 HILDA.

No, thank you. And besides, he is not in. He is over there with his
workmen. But he looked so fierce that I did not dare to talk to him.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

He is so kind and gentle in reality.

                                 HILDA.

_He!_

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

You do not really know him yet, Miss Wangel.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks affectionately at her._] Are you pleased at the thought of
moving over to the new house?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

I _ought_ to be pleased; for it is what Halvard wants——

                                 HILDA.

Oh, not just on that account, surely.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes, yes, Miss Wangel; for it is only my duty to submit myself to him.
But very often it is dreadfully difficult to force one’s mind to
obedience.

                                 HILDA.

Yes, that must be difficult indeed.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

I can tell you it is—when one has so many faults as I have——

                                 HILDA.

When one has gone through so much trouble as you have——

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

How do you know about that?

                                 HILDA.

Your husband told me.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

To me he very seldom mentions these things.—Yes, I can tell you I have
gone through more than enough trouble in my life, Miss Wangel.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks sympathetically at her and nods slowly._] Poor Mrs. Solness.
First of all there was the fire——

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_With a sigh._] Yes, everything that was _mine_ was burnt.

                                 HILDA.

And then came what was worse.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Looking inquiringly at her._] Worse?

                                 HILDA.

The worst of all.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

What do you mean?

                                 HILDA.

[_Softly._] You lost the two little boys.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh yes, the boys. But, you see, _that_ was a thing apart. That was a
dispensation of Providence; and in such things one can only bow in
submission—yes, and be thankful, too.

                                 HILDA.

Then you are so?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Not always, I am sorry to say. I know well enough that it is my duty—but
all the same I _cannot_.

                                 HILDA.

No, no, I think that is only natural.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

And often and often I have to remind myself that it was a righteous
punishment for me——

                                 HILDA.

Why?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Because I had not fortitude enough in misfortune.

                                 HILDA.

But I don’t see that——

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh, no, no, Miss Wangel—do not talk to me any more about the two little
boys. We ought to feel nothing but joy in thinking of _them_; for they
are so happy—so happy now. No, it is the _small_ losses in life that cut
one to the heart—the loss of all that other people look upon as almost
nothing.

                                 HILDA.

[_Lays her arms on MRS. SOLNESS’S knees, and looks up at her
affectionately._] Dear Mrs. Solness—tell me what things you mean!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

As I say, only little things. All the old portraits were burnt on the
walls. And all the old silk dresses were burnt, that had belonged to the
family for generations and generations. And all mother’s and
grandmother’s lace—that was burnt, too. And only think—the jewels, too!
[_Sadly._] And then all the dolls.

                                 HILDA.

The dolls?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Choking with tears._] I had nine lovely dolls.

                                 HILDA.

And _they_ were burnt too?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

All of them. Oh, it was hard—so hard for me.

                                 HILDA.

Had you put by all these dolls, then? Ever since you were little?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

I had not put them by. The dolls and I had gone on living together.

                                 HILDA.

After you were grown up?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes, long after that.

                                 HILDA.

After you were married, too?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh yes, indeed. So long as he did not see it——. But they were all burnt
up, poor things. No one thought of saving _them_. Oh, it is so miserable
to think of. You mustn’t laugh at me, Miss Wangel.

                                 HILDA.

I am not laughing in the least.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

For you see, in a certain sense, there was life in them, too. I carried
them under my heart—like little unborn children.

DR. HERDAL, _with his hat in his hand, comes out through the door, and
    observes_ MRS. SOLNESS _and HILDA._

                              DR. HERDAL.

Well, Mrs. Solness, so you are sitting out here catching cold?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

I find it so pleasant and warm here to-day.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Yes, yes. But is there anything going on here? I got a note from you.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Rises._] Yes, there is something I must talk to you about.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Very well; then perhaps we had better go in. [_To HILDA._] Still in your
mountaineering dress, Miss Wangel?

                                 HILDA.

[_Gaily, rising._] Yes—in full uniform! But to-day I am not going
climbing and breaking my neck. We two will stop quietly below and look
on, doctor.

                              DR. HERDAL.

What are we to look on at?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Softly, in alarm, to HILDA._] Hush, hush—for God’s sake! He is coming!
Try to get that idea out of his head. And let us be friends, Miss
Wangel. Don’t you think we can?

                                 HILDA.

[_Throws her arms impetuously round MRS. SOLNESS’S neck._] Oh, if we
only could!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Gently disengages herself._] There, there, there! There he comes,
doctor. Let me have a word with you.

                              DR. HERDAL.

Is it about _him_!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes, to be sure it’s about him. Do come in.

_She and the doctor enter the house. Next moment_ SOLNESS _comes up from
    the garden by the flight of steps. A serious look comes over_
    HILDA’S _face._

                                SOLNESS.

[_Glances at the house-door, which is closed cautiously from within._]
Have you noticed, Hilda, that as soon as I come, she goes?

                                 HILDA.

I have noticed that as soon as you come, you _make_ her go.

                                SOLNESS.

Perhaps so. But I cannot help it. [_Looks observantly at her._] Are you
cold, Hilda? I think you look cold.

                                 HILDA.

I have just come up out of a tomb.

                                SOLNESS.

What do you mean by _that_?

                                 HILDA.

That I have got chilled through and through, Mr. Solness.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Slowly._] I believe I understand——

                                 HILDA.

What brings you up here just now?

                                SOLNESS.

I caught sight of you from over there.

                                 HILDA.

But then you must have seen her too?

                                SOLNESS.

I knew she would go at once if I came.

                                 HILDA.

Is it very painful for you that she should avoid you in this way?

                                SOLNESS.

In one sense, it’s a relief as well.

                                 HILDA.

Not to have her before your eyes?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes.

                                 HILDA.

Not to be always seeing how heavily the loss of the little boys weighs
upon her?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes. Chiefly that.

          [HILDA _drifts across the verandah with her hands behind her
            back, stops at the railing and looks out over the garden._

                                SOLNESS.

[_After a short pause._] Did you have a long talk with her?

                         [_HILDA stands motionless and does not answer._

                                SOLNESS.

Had you a long talk, I asked?

                                           [_HILDA is silent as before._

                                SOLNESS.

What was she talking about, Hilda?

                                              [_HILDA continues silent._

                                SOLNESS.

Poor Aline! I suppose it was about the little boys.

                                 HILDA.

          [_A nervous shudder runs through her; then she nods hurriedly
            once or twice._

                                SOLNESS.

She will never get over it—never in this world. [_Approaches her._] Now
you are standing there again like a statue; just as you stood last
night.

                                 HILDA.

[_Turns and looks at him, with great serious eyes._] I am going away.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Sharply._] Going away!

                                 HILDA.

Yes.

                                SOLNESS.

But I won’t allow you to!

                                 HILDA.

What am I to do _here_ now?

                                SOLNESS.

Simply to be here, Hilda!

                                 HILDA.

[_Measures him with a look._] Oh, thank you. You know it wouldn’t end
_there_.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Heedlessly._] So much the better!

                                 HILDA.

[_Vehemently._] I _cannot_ do any harm to one whom I _know_! I can’t
take away anything that belongs to her.

                                SOLNESS.

Who wants you to do that?

                                 HILDA.

[_Continuing._] A stranger, yes! for that is quite a different thing! A
person I have never set eyes on. But one that I have come into close
contact with——! Oh no! Oh no! Ugh!

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, but I never proposed you should.

                                 HILDA.

Oh, Mr. Solness, you know quite well what the end of it would be. And
that is why I am going away.

                                SOLNESS.

And what is to become of _me_ when you are gone? What shall I have to
live for _then_?—After that?

                                 HILDA.

[_With the indefinable look in her eyes._] It is surely not so hard for
_you_. You have your duties to her. Live for those duties.

                                SOLNESS.

Too late. These powers—these—these——

                                 HILDA.

——devils——

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, these devils! And the troll within me as well—they have drawn all
the life-blood out of her. [_Laughs in desperation._] They did it for my
_happiness_! Yes, yes! [_Sadly._] And now she is dead—for my sake. And I
am chained alive to a dead woman. [_In wild anguish._] _I—I_ who cannot
live without joy in life!

          [HILDA _moves round the table and seats herself on the bench,
            with her elbows on the table, and her head supported by her
            hands._

                                 HILDA.

[_Sits and looks at him awhile._] What will you build next?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Shakes his head._] I don’t believe I shall build much more.

                                 HILDA.

Not those cosy, happy homes for mother and father, and for the troop of
children?

                                SOLNESS.

I wonder whether there will be any use for such homes in the coming
time.

                                 HILDA.

Poor Mr. Solness! And you have gone all these ten years—and staked your
whole life—on that alone.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, you may well say so, Hilda.

                                 HILDA.

[_With an outburst._] Oh, it all seems to me so foolish—so foolish!

                                SOLNESS.

All what?

                                 HILDA.

Not to be able to grasp at your own happiness—at your own life! Merely
because some one you know happens to stand in the way!

                                SOLNESS.

One whom you have no right to set aside.

                                 HILDA.

I wonder whether one really _has not_ the right! And yet, and yet——. Oh!
if one could only sleep the whole thing away!

          [_She lays her arms flat down on the table, rests the left
            side of her head on her hands, and shuts her eyes._

                                SOLNESS.

[_Turns the arm-chair and sits down at the table._] Had you a cosy,
happy home—up there with your father, Hilda?

                                 HILDA.

[_Without stirring, answers as if half asleep._] I had only a cage.

                                SOLNESS.

And you are determined not to go back to it?

                                 HILDA.

[_As before._] The wild bird never wants to go into the cage.

                                SOLNESS.

Rather range through the free air——

                                 HILDA.

[_Still as before._] The bird of prey loves to range——

                                SOLNESS.

[_Lets his eyes rest on her._] If only one had the viking-spirit in
life——

                                 HILDA.

[_In her usual voice; opens her eyes but does not move._] And the other
thing? Say what _that_ was!

                                SOLNESS.

A robust conscience.

          [HILDA _sits erect on the bench, with animation. Her eyes have
            once more the sparkling expression of gladness._

                                 HILDA.

[_Nods to him._] _I_ know what you are going to build next!

                                SOLNESS.

Then you know more than I do, Hilda.

                                 HILDA.

Yes, builders are such stupid people.

                                SOLNESS.

What is it to be then?

                                 HILDA.

[_Nods again._] The castle.

                                SOLNESS.

What castle?

                                 HILDA.

_My_ castle, of course.

                                SOLNESS.

Do you want a castle now?

                                 HILDA.

Don’t you owe me a kingdom, I should like to know?

                                SOLNESS.

You say I do.

                                 HILDA.

Well—you admit you owe me this kingdom. And you can’t have a kingdom
without a royal castle, I should think!

                                SOLNESS.

[_More and more animated._] Yes, they usually go together.

                                 HILDA.

Good! Then build it for me! This moment!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Laughing._] Must you have that on the instant, too?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, to be sure! For the ten years are up now, and I am not going to
wait any longer. So—out with the castle, Mr. Solness!

                                SOLNESS.

It’s no light matter to owe _you_ anything, Hilda.

                                 HILDA.

You should have thought of that before. It is too late now. So—[_tapping
the table_]—the castle on the table! It is _my_ castle! I will have it
_at once_!

                                SOLNESS.

[_More seriously, leans over towards her, with his arms on the table._]
What sort of castle have you imagined, Hilda?

          [_Her expression becomes more and more veiled. She seems
            gazing inwards at herself._

                                 HILDA.

[_Slowly._] My castle shall stand on a height—on a very great
height—with a clear outlook on all sides, so that I can see far—far
around.

                                SOLNESS.

And no doubt it is to have a high tower!

                                 HILDA.

A tremendously high tower. And at the very top of the tower there shall
be a balcony. And I will stand out upon it——

                                SOLNESS.

[_Involuntarily clutches at his forehead._] How can you like to stand at
such a dizzy height——?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, I will! Right up there will I stand and look down on the other
people—on those that are building churches, and homes for mother and
father and the troop of children. And _you_ may come up and look on at
it, too.

                                SOLNESS.

[_In a low tone._] Is the builder to be allowed to come up beside the
princess?

                                 HILDA.

If the builder _will_.

                                SOLNESS.

[_More softly._] Then I think the builder will come.

                                 HILDA.

[_Nods._] The builder—he will come.

                                SOLNESS.

But he will never be able to build any more. Poor builder!

                                 HILDA.

[_Animated._] Oh yes, he will! We two will set to work together. And
then we will build the loveliest—the very loveliest—thing in all the
world.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Intently._] Hilda—tell me what that is!

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks smilingly at him, shakes her head a little, pouts, and speaks as
if to a child._] Builders—they are such very—very stupid people.

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, no doubt they are stupid. But now tell me what it is—the loveliest
thing in the world—that we two are to build together?

                                 HILDA.

[_Is silent a little while, then says with an indefinable expression in
her eyes._] Castles in the air.

                                SOLNESS.

Castles in the air?

                                 HILDA.

[_Nods._] Castles in the air, yes! Do you know what sort of thing a
castle in the air is?

                                SOLNESS.

It is the loveliest thing in the world, you say.

                                 HILDA.

[_Rises with vehemence, and makes a gesture of repulsion with her
hand._] Yes, to be sure it is! Castles in the air—they are so easy to
take refuge in. And so easy to build, too—[_looks scornfully at
him_]—especially for the builders who have a—a dizzy conscience.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Rises._] After this day we two will build together, Hilda.

                                 HILDA.

[_With a half-dubious smile._] A real castle in the air?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes. One with a firm foundation under it.

          RAGNAR BROVIK _comes out from the house. He is carrying a
            large, green wreath with flowers and silk ribbons._

                                 HILDA.

[_With an outburst of pleasure._] The wreath! Oh, that will be glorious!

                                SOLNESS.

[_In surprise._] Have _you_ brought the wreath Ragnar?

                                RAGNAR.

I promised the foreman I would.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Relieved._] Ah, then I suppose your father is better?

                                RAGNAR.

No.

                                SOLNESS.

Was he not cheered by what I wrote?

                                RAGNAR.

It came too late.

                                SOLNESS.

Too late!

                                RAGNAR.

When she came with it he was unconscious. He had had a stroke.

                                SOLNESS.

Why, then, you must go home to him! You must attend to your father!

                                RAGNAR.

He does not need me any more.

                                SOLNESS.

But surely you ought to be with him.

                                RAGNAR.

_She_ is sitting by his bed.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Rather uncertainly._] Kaia?

                                RAGNAR.

[_Looking darkly at him._] Yes—Kaia.

                                SOLNESS.

Go home, Ragnar—both to him and to her. Give me the wreath.

                                RAGNAR.

[_Suppresses a mocking smile._] You don’t mean that you yourself——?

                                SOLNESS.

I will take it down to them myself. [_Takes the wreath from him._] And
now you go home; we don’t require you to-day.

                                RAGNAR.

I know you do not require me any more; but to-day I shall remain.

                                SOLNESS.

Well, remain then, since you are bent upon it.

                                 HILDA.

[_At the railing._] Mr. Solness, I will stand here and look on at you.

                                SOLNESS.

At me!

                                 HILDA.

It will be fearfully thrilling.

                                SOLNESS.

[_In a low tone._] We will talk about that presently, Hilda.

          [_He goes down the flight of steps with the wreath, and away
            through the garden._

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks after him, then turns to RAGNAR._] I think you might at least
have thanked him.

                                RAGNAR.

Thanked him? Ought I to have thanked _him_?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, of course you ought!

                                RAGNAR.

I think it is rather _you_ I ought to thank.

                                 HILDA.

How can you say such a thing?

                                RAGNAR.

[_Without answering her._] But I advise you to take care, Miss Wangel!
For you don’t know _him_ rightly yet.

                                 HILDA.

[_Ardently._] Oh, no one knows him as I do!

                                RAGNAR.

[_Laughs in exasperation._] Thank him, when he has held me down year
after year! When he made father disbelieve in me—made me disbelieve in
myself! And all merely that he might——!

                                 HILDA.

[_As if divining something._] That he might——? Tell me at once!

                                RAGNAR.

That he might keep her with him.

                                 HILDA.

[_With a start towards him._] The girl at the desk.

                                RAGNAR.

Yes.

                                 HILDA.

[_Threateningly, clenching her hands._] That is not true! You are
telling falsehoods about him!

                                RAGNAR.

I would not believe it either until to-day—when she said so herself.

                                 HILDA.

[_As if beside herself._] _What_ did she say? I _will_ know! At once! at
once!

                                RAGNAR.

She said that he had taken possession of her mind—her whole mind—centred
all her thoughts upon himself alone. She says that she can never leave
him—that she will remain here, where _he_ is——

                                 HILDA.

[_With flashing eyes._] She will not be allowed to!

                                RAGNAR.

[_As if feeling his way._] Who will not allow her?

                                 HILDA.

[_Rapidly._] _He_ will not either!

                                RAGNAR.

Oh no—I understand the whole thing now. After this, she would merely
be—in the way.

                                 HILDA.

You understand nothing—since you can talk like that! No, _I_ will tell
you why he kept hold of her.

                                RAGNAR.

Well then, why?

                                 HILDA.

In order to keep hold of _you_.

                                RAGNAR.

Has he told you so?

                                 HILDA.

No, but it is so. It _must_ be so! [_Wildly._] I will—I _will_ have it
so!

                                RAGNAR.

And at the very moment when _you_ came—he let her go.

                                 HILDA.

It was _you_—_you_ that he let go! What do you suppose he cares about
strange women like her?

                                RAGNAR.

[_Reflects._] Is it possible that all this time he has been afraid of
me?

                                 HILDA.

_He_ afraid! I would not be so conceited if I were you.

                                RAGNAR.

Oh, he must have seen long ago that I had something in me, too.
Besides—cowardly—that is just what he is, you see.

                                 HILDA.

He! Oh yes, I am likely to believe _that_!

                                RAGNAR.

In a certain sense he is cowardly—he, the great master builder. He is
not afraid of robbing others of their life’s happiness—as he has done
both for my father and for me. But when it comes to climbing up a paltry
bit of scaffolding—he will do anything rather than _that_.

                                 HILDA.

Oh, you should just have seen him high, high up—at the dizzy height
where I once saw him.

                                RAGNAR.

Did you see that?

                                 HILDA.

Yes, indeed I did. How free and great he looked as he stood and fastened
the wreath to the church vane!

                                RAGNAR.

I know that he ventured that, _once_ in his life—one solitary time. It
is a legend among us younger men. But no power on earth would induce him
to do it again.

                                 HILDA.

To-day he will do it again!

                                RAGNAR.

[_Scornfully._] Yes, I daresay!

                                 HILDA.

We shall see it!

                                RAGNAR.

That neither you nor I will see.

                                 HILDA.

[_With uncontrollable vehemence._] I _will_ see it! I _will_ and I
_must_ see it!

                                RAGNAR.

But he will not do it. He simply dare not do it. For you see he cannot
get over this infirmity—master builder though he be.

        _MRS. SOLNESS comes from the house on to the verandah._

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Looks around._] Is he not here? Where has he gone to?

                                RAGNAR.

Mr. Solness is down with the men.

                                 HILDA.

He took the wreath with him.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Terrified._] Took the wreath with him! Oh God! oh God! Brovik—you must
go down to him! Get him to come back here!

                                RAGNAR.

Shall I say you want to speak to him, Mrs. Solness?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh yes, do!—No, no—don’t say that _I_ want anything! You can say that
somebody is here, and that he must come at once.

                                RAGNAR.

Good. I will do so, Mrs. Solness.

          [_He goes down the flight of steps and away through the
            garden._

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh, Miss Wangel, you can’t think how anxious I feel about him.

                                 HILDA.

Is there anything in this to be so terribly frightened about?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh yes; surely you can understand. Just think, if he were really to do
it! If he should take it into his head to climb up the scaffolding!

                                 HILDA.

[_Eagerly._] Do you think he will?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh, one can never tell what he might take into his head. I am afraid
there is nothing he mightn’t think of doing.

                                 HILDA.

Aha! Perhaps you too think that he is—well——?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh, I don’t know what to think about him now. The doctor has been
telling me all sorts of things; and putting it all together with several
things I have heard him say——

                  DR. HERDAL _looks out, at the door._

                              DR. HERDAL.

Is he not coming soon?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes, I think so. I have sent for him at any rate.

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_Advancing._] I am afraid you will have to go in, my dear lady——

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh no! Oh no! I shall stay out here and wait for Halvard.

                              DR. HERDAL.

But some ladies have just come to call on you——

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Good heavens, _that_ too! And just at this moment!

                              DR. HERDAL.

They say they positively must see the ceremony.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Well, well, I suppose I must go to them after all. It is my duty.

                                 HILDA.

Can’t you ask the ladies to go away?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

No, that would never do. Now that they are here, it is my duty to see
them. But do you stay out here in the meantime—and receive him when he
comes.

                              DR. HERDAL.

And try to occupy his attention as long as possible——

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes, do, dear Miss Wangel. Keep as firm hold of him as ever you can.

                                 HILDA.

Would it not be best for you to do that?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes; God knows that is my duty. But when one has duties in so many
directions——

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_Looks towards the garden._] There he is coming.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

And I have to go in!

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_To HILDA._] Don’t say anything about _my_ being here.

                                 HILDA.

Oh no! I daresay I shall find something else to talk to Mr. Solness
about.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

And be sure you keep firm hold of him. I believe you can do it best.

          [MRS. SOLNESS _and_ DR. HERDAL _go into the house._ HILDA
            _remains standing on the verandah._ SOLNESS _comes from the
            garden, up the flight of steps._

                                SOLNESS.

Somebody wants me, I hear.

                                 HILDA.

Yes; it is I, Mr. Solness.

                                SOLNESS.

Oh, is it you, Hilda? I was afraid it might be Aline or the Doctor.

                                 HILDA.

You are very easily frightened, it seems!

                                SOLNESS.

Do you think so?

                                 HILDA.

Yes; people say that you are afraid to climb about—on the scaffoldings,
you know.

                                SOLNESS.

Well, that is quite a special thing.

                                 HILDA.

Then it is true that you are afraid to do it?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, I am.

                                 HILDA.

Afraid of falling down and killing yourself?

                                SOLNESS.

No, not of that.

                                 HILDA.

Of what, then?

                                SOLNESS.

I am afraid of retribution, Hilda.

                                 HILDA.

Of retribution? [_Shakes her head._] I don’t understand that.

                                SOLNESS.

Sit down, and I will tell you something.

                                 HILDA.

Yes, do! At once!

          [_She sits on a stool by the railing, and looks expectantly at
            him._

                                SOLNESS.

[_Throws his hat on the table._] You know that I began by building
churches.

                                 HILDA.

[_Nods._] I know that well.

                                SOLNESS.

For, you see, I came as a boy from a pious home in the country; and so
it seemed to me that this church-building was the noblest task I could
set myself.

                                 HILDA.

Yes, yes.

                                SOLNESS.

And I venture to say that I built those poor little churches with such
honest and warm and heartfelt devotion that—that——

                                 HILDA.

That——? Well?

                                SOLNESS.

Well, that I think that he ought to have been pleased with me.

                                 HILDA.

_He?_ What _he_?

                                SOLNESS.

He who was to have the churches, of course! He to whose honour and glory
they were dedicated.

                                 HILDA.

Oh, indeed! But are you certain, then, that—that he was not—pleased with
you?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Scornfully._] _He_ pleased with _me_! How can you talk so, Hilda? He
who gave the troll in me leave to lord it just as it pleased. He who
bade them be at hand to serve me, both day and night—all these—all
these——

                                 HILDA.

Devils——

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, of both kinds. Oh no, he made me feel clearly enough that he was
not pleased with me. [_Mysteriously._] You see, that was really the
reason why he made the old house burn down.

                                 HILDA.

Was that why?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, don’t you understand? He wanted to give me the chance of becoming
an accomplished master in my own sphere—so that I might build all the
more glorious churches for him. At first I did not understand what he
was driving at; but all of a sudden it flashed upon me.

                                 HILDA.

When was that?

                                SOLNESS.

It was when I was building the church-tower up at Lysanger.

                                 HILDA.

I thought so.

                                SOLNESS.

For you see, Hilda—up there, amidst those new surroundings, I used to go
about musing and pondering within myself. Then I saw plainly why he had
taken my little children from me. It was that I should have nothing else
to attach myself to. No such thing as love and happiness, you
understand. I was to be only a master builder—nothing else. And all my
life long I was to go on building for him. [_Laughs._] But I can tell
you nothing came of _that_!

                                 HILDA.

What did you do, then?

                                SOLNESS.

First of all, I searched and tried my own heart——

                                 HILDA.

And then?

                                SOLNESS.

Then I did the _impossible_—I no less than _he_.

                                 HILDA.

The impossible?

                                SOLNESS.

I had never before been able to climb up to a great, free height. But
that day I did it.

                                 HILDA.

[_Leaping up._] Yes, yes, you did!

                                SOLNESS.

And when I stood there, high over everything, and was hanging the wreath
over the vane, I said to him: Hear me now, thou Mighty One! From this
day forward I will be a free builder—I too, in my sphere—just as thou in
thine. I will never more build churches for thee—only homes for human
beings.

                                 HILDA.

[_With great sparkling eyes._] _That_ was the song that I heard through
the air!

                                SOLNESS.

But afterwards his turn came.

                                 HILDA.

What do you mean by _that_?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks despondently at her._] Building homes for human beings—is not
worth a rap, Hilda.

                                 HILDA.

Do you say _that_ now?

                                SOLNESS.

Yes, for now I see it. Men have no use for these homes of theirs—to be
happy in. And I should not have had any use for such a home, if I had
had one. [_With a quiet, bitter laugh._] See, that is the upshot of the
whole affair, however far back I look. Nothing really built; nor
anything sacrificed for the chance of building. Nothing, nothing! the
whole is nothing!

                                 HILDA.

Then you will never build anything more?

                                SOLNESS.

[_With animation._] On the contrary; I am just going to begin!

                                 HILDA.

What, then? What will you build? Tell me at once!

                                SOLNESS.

I believe there is only one possible dwelling-place for human
happiness—and that is what I am going to build now.

                                 HILDA.

[_Looks fixedly at him._] Mr. Solness—you mean our castles in the air.

                                SOLNESS.

The castles in the air—yes.

                                 HILDA.

I am afraid you would turn dizzy before we got half-way up.

                                SOLNESS.

Not if I can mount hand in hand with you, Hilda.

                                 HILDA.

[_With an expression of suppressed resentment._] Only with me? Will
there be no others of the party?

                                SOLNESS.

Who else should there be?

                                 HILDA.

Oh—that girl—that Kaia at the desk. Poor thing—don’t you want to take
her with you too?

                                SOLNESS.

Oho! Was it about her that Aline was talking to you?

                                 HILDA.

Is it so—or is it not?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Vehemently._] I will not answer such a question You must believe in
me, wholly and entirely!

                                 HILDA.

All these ten years I have believed in you so utterly—so utterly.

                                SOLNESS.

You must go on believing in me!

                                 HILDA.

Then let me see you stand free and high up!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Sadly._] Oh Hilda—it is not every day that I can do that.

                                 HILDA.

[_Passionately._] I will have you do it! I will have it!
[_Imploringly._] Just once more, Mr. Solness! Do the _impossible_ once
again!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Stands and looks deep into her eyes._] If I try it, Hilda, I will
stand up there and talk to him as I did that time before.

                                 HILDA.

[_In rising excitement._] What will you say to him?

                                SOLNESS.

I will say to him: Hear me, Mighty Lord—thou may’st judge me as seems
best to thee. But hereafter I will build nothing but the loveliest thing
in the world——

                                 HILDA.

[_Carried away._] Yes—yes—yes!

                                SOLNESS.

—build it together with a princess, whom I love——

                                 HILDA.

Yes, tell him that! Tell him that!

                                SOLNESS.

Yes. And then I will say to him: Now I shall go down and throw my arms
round her and kiss her——

                                 HILDA.

—many times! Say that!

                                SOLNESS.

—many, many times, I will say.

                                 HILDA.

And then——?

                                SOLNESS.

Then I will wave my hat—and come down to the earth—and do as I said to
him.

                                 HILDA.

[_With outstretched arms._] Now I see you again as I did when there was
song in the air!

                                SOLNESS.

[_Looks at her with his head bowed._] How have you become what you are,
Hilda?

                                 HILDA.

How have you made me what I am?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Shortly and firmly._] The princess shall have her castle.

                                 HILDA.

[_Jubilant, clapping her hands._] Oh, Mr. Solness——! My lovely, lovely
castle. Our castle in the air!

                                SOLNESS.

On a firm foundation.

          [_In the street a crowd of people has assembled, vaguely seen
            through the trees. Music of wind-instruments is heard far
            away behind the new house._

MRS. SOLNESS, _with a fur collar round her neck,_ DOCTOR HERDAL _with
    her white shawl on his arm, and some ladies, come out on the
    verandah._ RAGNAR BROVIK _comes at the same time up from the
    garden._

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_To RAGNAR._] Are we to have music, too?

                                RAGNAR.

Yes. It’s the band of the Mason’s Union. [_To SOLNESS._] The foreman
asked me to tell you that he is ready now to go up with the wreath.

                                SOLNESS.

[_Takes his hat._] Good. I will go down to him myself.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Anxiously._] What have you to do down there, Halvard?

                                SOLNESS.

[_Curtly._] I must be down below with the men.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Yes, down below—only down below.

                                SOLNESS.

That is where I always stand—on everyday occasions.

          [_He goes down the flight of steps and away through the
            garden._

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Calls after him over the railing._] But do beg the man to be careful
when he goes up! Promise me that, Halvard!

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_To MRS. SOLNESS._] Don’t you see that I was right? He has given up all
thought of that folly.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh, what a relief! Twice workmen have fallen, and each time they were
killed on the spot. [_Turns to HILDA._] Thank you, Miss Wangel, for
having kept such a firm hold upon him. I should never have been able to
manage him.

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_Playfully._] Yes, yes, Miss Wangel, you know how to keep firm hold on
a man, when you give your mind to it.

          [MRS. SOLNESS _and_ DR. HERDAL _go up to the ladies, who are
            standing nearer to the steps and looking over the garden._
            HILDA _remains standing beside the railing in the
            foreground._ RAGNAR _goes up to her._

                                RAGNAR.

[_With suppressed laughter, half whispering._] Miss Wangel—do you see
all those young fellows down in the street?

                                 HILDA.

Yes.

                                RAGNAR.

They are my fellow students, come to look at the master.

                                 HILDA.

What do they want to look at _him_ for?

                                RAGNAR.

They want to see how he daren’t climb to the top of his own house.

                                 HILDA.

Oh, _that_ is what those boys want, is it?

                                RAGNAR.

[_Spitefully and scornfully._] He has kept us down so long—now we are
going to see him keep quietly down below himself.

                                 HILDA.

You will not see that—not this time.

                                RAGNAR.

[_Smiles._] Indeed! Then where shall we see him?

                                 HILDA.

High—high up by the vane! That is where you will see him!

                                RAGNAR.

[_Laughs._] Him! Oh yes, I daresay!

                                 HILDA.

His _will_ is to reach the top—so at the top you shall see him.

                                RAGNAR.

His _will_, yes; that I can easily believe. But he simply _cannot_ do
it. His head would swim round, long, long before he got half-way. He
would have to crawl down again on his hands and knees.

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_Points across._] Look! There goes the foreman up the ladders.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

And of course he has the wreath to carry too. Oh, I do hope he will be
careful!

                                RAGNAR.

[_Stares incredulously and shouts._] Why, but it’s——

                                 HILDA.

[_Breaking out in jubilation._] It is the master builder himself?

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Screams with terror._] Yes, it is Halvard! Oh my great God——! Halvard!
Halvard!

                              DR. HERDAL.

Hush! Don’t shout to him!

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

[_Half beside herself._] I must go to him! I must get him to come down
again!

                              DR. HERDAL.

[_Holds her._] Don’t move, any of you! Not a sound!

                                 HILDA.

[_Immovable, follows SOLNESS with her eyes._] He climbs and climbs.
Higher and higher! Higher and higher! Look! Just look!

                                RAGNAR.

[_Breathless._] He _must_ turn now. He can’t possibly help it.

                                 HILDA.

He climbs and climbs. He will soon be at the top now.

                             MRS. SOLNESS.

Oh, I shall die of terror. I cannot bear to see it

                              DR. HERDAL.

Then don’t look up at him.

                                 HILDA.

There he is standing on the topmost planks Right at the top!

                              DR. HERDAL.

Nobody must move! Do you hear?

                                 HILDA.

[_Exulting, with quiet intensity._] At last! At last! Now I see him
great and free again!

                                RAGNAR.

[_Almost voiceless._] But this is im——

                                 HILDA.

So I have seen him all through these ten years. How secure he stands!
Frightfully thrilling all the same. Look at him! Now he is hanging the
wreath round the vane!

                                RAGNAR.

I feel as if I were looking at something utterly impossible.

                                 HILDA.

Yes, it is the _impossible_ that he is doing now! [_With the indefinable
expression in her eyes._] Can you see any one else up there with him?

                                RAGNAR.

There is no one else.

                                 HILDA.

Yes, there is one he is striving with.

                                RAGNAR.

You are mistaken.

                                 HILDA.

Then do you hear no song in the air, either?

                                RAGNAR.

It must be the wind in the tree-tops.

                                 HILDA.

I hear a song—a mighty song! [_Shouts in wild jubilation and glee._]
Look, look! Now he is waving his hat! He is waving it to us down here!
Oh, wave, wave back to him! For now it is finished! [_Snatches the white
shawl from the Doctor, waves it, and shouts up to SOLNESS._] Hurrah for
Master Builder Solness!

                              DR. HERDAL.

Stop! Stop! For God’s sake——!

          [_The ladies on the verandah wave their pocket-handkerchiefs,
            and the shouts of “Hurrah” are taken up in the street below.
            Then they are suddenly silenced, and the crowd bursts out
            into a shriek of horror. A human body, with planks and
            fragments of wood, is vaguely perceived crashing down behind
            the trees._

                      MRS. SOLNESS AND THE LADIES.

[_At the same time._] He is falling! He is falling!

          [MRS. SOLNESS _totters, falls backwards, swooning, and is
            caught, amid cries and confusion, by the ladies. The crowd
            in the street breaks down the fence and storms into the
            garden. At the same time_ DR. HERDAL, _too, rushes down
            thither. A short pause._

                                 HILDA.

[_Stares fixedly upwards and says, as if petrified._] _My_ Master
Builder.

                                RAGNAR.

[_Supports himself, trembling, against the railing._] He must be dashed
to pieces—killed on the spot.

                           ONE OF THE LADIES.

[_Whilst Mrs. Solness is carried into the house._] Run down for the
doctor——

                                RAGNAR.

I can’t stir a foot——

                             ANOTHER LADY.

Then call to some one!

                                RAGNAR.

[_Tries to call out._] How is it? Is he alive?

                                A VOICE.

[_Below, in the garden._] Mr. Solness is dead!

                             OTHER VOICES.

[_Nearer._] The head is all crushed.—He fell right into the quarry.

                                 HILDA.

[_Turns to Ragnar, and says quietly._] I can’t see him up there now.

                                RAGNAR.

This is terrible. So, after all, he could not do it.

                                 HILDA.

[_As if in quiet spell-bound triumph._] But he mounted right to the top.
And I heard harps in the air. [_Waves her shawl in the air, and shrieks
with wild intensity._] _My—my_ Master Builder!

                        BALLANTYNE & COMPANY LTD
                     TAVISTOCK STREET COVENT GARDEN
                                 LONDON

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           Transcriber’s Note

There are quite a few instances of missing punctuation. The conventional
period following the character’s name is sometimes missing and has been
added for consistency’s sake without further comment. Those missing from
setting and stage direction are also added without comment, since there
is no obvious purpose to be served by the omission. However, the
restoration of punctuation missing from dialogue is noted below, since
the punctuation can be expressive. Several instances of dubious ‘?’
marks have been corrected, based on context.

A line at 45.22 ends with no punctuation, which could plausibly be
either an exclamation or a question mark. A stage direction at 93.10
ends with an exclamation which perhaps should be a colon. A line at
362.9 also ends with no punction which could be a full stop or
exclamation. A line at 172.18 lacks punctuation should be a full stop or
exclamation. At line 362.13 punctuation could be also be a full top of
exclamation.

Volume I of this series included errata for each succeeding volume, and
noted the following for Volume X. Each of these was corrected in
printing.

Other errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been corrected,
and are noted here. The references are to the page and line in the
original.

  19.23    a whole flood of sunshine[.]                   Added.
  34.15    Isn’t that good news, [’]Hedda?                Removed.
  36.27    write him a cordial, friendly letter[.]        Added.
  43.21    And for Eilert Lövb[e/o]rg, Thea.              Replaced.
  47.30    stands between Eilert Lövb[e/o]rg and me.      Replaced.
  52.6     are still wanting[,/.]                         Replaced.
  58.25    how can you be so indifferent about it[./?]    Replaced.
  127.25   And no one _must_ know it[.]                   Added.\how
                                                          could you
                                                          treat
  148.7    her so heartlessly[./?]                        Replaced.
  177.23   to see under that lamp[.]                      Added.
  201.15   No, [on/no]; I suppose you can’t.              Transposed.
  205.2    [_In nervous exaltation._][.] My God! My God!' Removed.
  215.20   had gone to the dogs[.]                        Added.
  217.18   That was most extraordinary[.]                 Added.
  228.2    And don’t you know any one here[?]             Added.
  240.20   But did I really _say_ all that[?]             Added.
  243.8    then I _did_ do it, I suppose[.]               Added.
  259.24   moved into the new house[.]                    Added.
  275.4    What was it[?]                                 Added.
  298.27   I should think[.]                              Added.
  320.9    and bu[li/il]t houses for strangers            Transposed.
  331.13   You have your duties to her[.]                 Added.
  338.28   [I ]promised the foreman I would.              Restored?
  361.5    he has the wreath to carry too[.]              Added.
  364.2    Stop! Stop[!] For God’s sake——!                Added.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74237 ***
